the world is a chaotic and beautiful
place but to take in the beauty we first
have to bring order to the chaos to do
that though I think we have to take
responsibility for the state of our
minds and our lives how do you take
responsibility for moving
forward I think the first step is to try
and understand ourselves in sort of
observable ways which often we don't do
of taking stock of what is it that I
know about myself uh what do what am I
aware of that may or may not have
changed in me we hide a lot from
ourselves so the idea of curiosity and
self-scrutiny tells us a lot right it
can tell us a lot but it also tells us
that there's so much of which we are not
readily aware so our minds are like
icebergs right with the the conscious
part of the Mind above the water and the
much larger part underneath right so so
understanding ourselves is often a much
richer process right than than just
taking an inventory of self for example
and and self-examination includes
reflection talking with others sometimes
Psychotherapy the kind of things we do
to to grow ourselves right so reading
and learning so the the process of
understanding ourselves is uh taking
stock in a sort of inventory kind of way
but that's really the beginning and even
that is not easy your life is still your
responsibility right my life is my
responsibility From This Moment forward
there are people who can help me there
are people who love me and care about me
and you know people who can take care of
me professionally like all those things
are true but I'm responsible for myself
and often taking responsibility for
ourselves going forward we have to feel
that we can do that right I have to not
be terrified of taking responsibility
for myself or think that oh I can't do
that right I I'm I'm cursed and it'll
never go well or I'm incompetent I don't
know how to take care of myself and
think the way that we find find it
within ourselves to take responsibility
for ourselves is often to release
ourselves from the lessons of the trauma
if that Mak the lessons of the trauma
right so so trauma false lessons right
trauma makes false lessons within us so
if I think I was hit by a drunk driver
and it's my fault because I shouldn't
have been out at night right it's my
fault I shouldn't have driven that way
home it's my fault because I I got mad
at one of my children earlier and and I
wasn't thinking straight after I let
that anger come out right then there's a
reflex of Shame right that is telling me
that I should be afraid right that I'm
incompetent I can't take care of myself
right or maybe God has it out for me or
Fate has it out for me or whatever it
may be and we have to understand that in
order to be able to put things in their
proper place of look something happened
to me that I couldn't control right I
mean I'm driving along I'm being safe
I'm being reasonable and someone hits me
blindsides me and you I'm really hurt or
now I'm living with the consequences of
that maybe for the rest of my life and
the the reflective shame of that is is
so strong you know probably because of a
combination of evolutionary mechanisms
that you know if something doesn't go
right and a person feels shame a person
is so attuned to that right and that may
have made sense in um evolutionary
stages of human development I mean again
that I don't know I know that it's in us
so I can try and think about what the
reasons might be evolutionarily but also
you know our
society is in so many ways absurd
bizarre right it doesn't tell us very
very basic facts that we need to know so
like traumas happen to us right big and
small and they create reflexive shame
like we we observe that we observe its
consequences but yet we don't say that
right we have a different societal model
that means like oh just don't think
about it and think about other things
right just life's got to go forward or
or if people don't want to talk about it
at all and then shame and responsibility
or fear festers inside of us right we so
so our response to trauma is to hide it
away is to not talk about the changes in
us and regardless of what the biology or
The evolutionary aspects are we know
that's facilitated by a society that
doesn't understand how to look at it
right if we thought okay there's been
major trauma what's the first priority
we as a society have when as a
responsibility to that person or even to
Society of wanting productive citizens
in society healthy citizens right would
be to oh my gosh we need to wrap around
that person we need to make sure that
resources that help that person talk and
express and understand what's inside of
them like we don't do that you know at
most somebody might knock on the door
once or or lock on the phone really once
or twice you want to talk you in the
hospital but we don't do that and
sometimes never ever is that death or
that injury is that trauma talked about
again and then it festers inside of
people and it changes people and this is
what we see when you know the the death
certificate I might see of a patient is
car accident accidental overdose but but
I know that that's not the cause of
death the cause of death is the trauma
that I I well know about and and and
where it drove that person but it's very
very hard to to be able to express and
to have the help wrap around someone in
ways that are just rational right in the
context of the data we have it's it's
not what happens in our modern society
the trauma is hit away the problems
fester and grow okay so there's uh a lot
of things in there that I want to tease
apart so one of them is I've heard you
talk about the in America we are five
times more likely to prescribe drugs for
somebody dealing with trauma than say or
I guess just in general than in the um
Netherlands and your hypothesis which
makes a lot of sense to me is that a
part of the culture is taking
responsibility and so I want to contrast
that with what you were just saying
where one of the responses that you want
to see Society reorient themselves
towards is wrapping themselves around
that person and I want to make this
problem as hard as possible so that we
deal with the person who's listening who
I really want a beautiful life moving
forward I want them to to actually solve
this problem but I'm going to assume
they can't get other people to wrap
around them probably partly because they
they either before the trauma didn't
know how to bridge that Gap or now post
trauma they don't know how to bridge
that Gap so starting from the idea of
taking
responsibility how do we do that in a
way where the person is doing it from a
position of self-love not self-loathing
right but that they can get themselves
to a point where then Society may be
able to respond well but I want to First
assume no one's coming to save you right
which is my Baseline thesis in life that
it is even though like one of the first
things I'm going to tell people is
loving relationships is critically
important however I think you have to
approach life with the belief no one's
coming to save me I have to do it myself
and so how does one pull themselves out
of the shame spiral if others aren't
wrapping themselves around them mhm the
first thing I would say is a person has
to run countercurrent to a societally
determined medical system that is not
going to change in the short term and
that pushes away from health so we have
a medical system that prioritizes
throughput right and throughput how fast
can I see patients yeah and how how many
how many patients can be seen in an hour
right me how many primary care doctors I
think the lifeblood of the health of all
of us right are suffering under systems
that that um think it's reasonable and
rational that they're going to have
giant panels of patients and C4 people
an hour maybe five if someone else is
out sick right so we we Short change all
of us right and then we have a system
that is based on like what is the bottom
line now like what is the bottom line in
the insurance industry in the
pharmaceutical industry and I'm all for
health insurance and I'm all for
medications right but we have a system
that is so out of balance that it
prioritizes throughput and because then
speed of like okay how can how much can
I listen to like this symptom that
symptom let write a prescription and
okay got to get you on your way right
because I got to take three breaths
right after 14 and 1 12 minutes before
this the next person comes in right that
is understandably of course that's going
to rely on heavily on medicines right
it's a lot easier to write prescriptions
than it is to talk to people okay so if
Step One is don't fall prey to a system
that's just going to give you medication
and move you on your way going back to
something you said earlier which is we
have to put things in their proper place
yes how do I do that so I'm not just
going to medicate but I need to
understand how to put things in their
place so let's say I'm following what
youve said so I'm looking at myself I
notice the changes I'm going to try to
pull myself out of the death spiral by
putting things in their proper place but
I don't know what that means so what is
the proper place for trauma so I think a
person is best served by taking stock of
what's going on inside of them which
doesn't mean that we have to understand
ourselves and what the trauma has done
to us right cuz that if that were there
the person would probably be in a
different place right like there's
there's fear and confusion and like
things aren't going well right so it's
it's taking stock of that and
recognizing what level is it at right if
it's at a level where a person really
doesn't want to be alive anymore is
having suicidal thoughts or plans then
like that's the time to figure out like
I need to go to a hospital right and and
if I go to a hospital and and I'm
sitting there for 12 hours in a waiting
room and no one is coming to see me and
I can't take it anymore like I have to
go to another hospital right so so we
have to be perseverant in getting what
we need because as you said no one's
going to reach out and help us right so
we take stock of what is it that I need
so in the situation where life may be at
risk okay it's a hospital right in other
situations we can also take stock of
what our resources are so for example if
you have insurance and you just call the
insurance and they say gosh we're so
sorry something awful has happened uh
there'll be a therapy appointment for
you in seven weeks right then like you
you have to be the squeaky wheel you
have to fight for that right you have to
fight for what is owed to you right like
you have insurance you should be getting
help right let's take that as a basic
premise if the help is not helpful then
you have to fight for yourself do you
have Baseline beliefs that you want the
patient to believe in so for instance
you're worth fighting for no matter what
happened to you you're still a valuable
human being absolutely 100% And if
you're not sure if you're a valuable
human being whether you can link it to
something that happened to you or not
that is a reason to get help that in and
of itself is always a reason to get help
we're all valuable human beings right so
if you're questioning that then yes you
look around you and say what help is
there for me to get and if there is no
insurance and there is no resources then
a person can try to understand like what
is it the community can provide right
there are often resources that may come
for free or very deeply discounted
through for example religious
organizations or other charitable
organizations right there are helping
people in the world again they're not
easy to find right or they can be that
it's not they're not easy to find but if
we if a person says like look I'm not
accepting what's going on in me or
what's happened to me or that that this
could be going on in me and there's
nothing for me right then then we need
to look at what's around us investigate
think ask right because we need to guide
ourselves to help as you said no one's
going to come take respons
responsibility for us like we don't live
in a society that functions that way and
often if you go for help you get
something that's not helpful right I
think if someone comes who who's very
unhealthy and overweight and out of
shape and starting to have
cardiovascular problems and they come
and see a physician and they walk away
with fre prescriptions and don't change
their habits right and think about that
compare it to someone who goes to a
physician who has more time to sit down
and talk to them and say look here's
what needs to change in your life which
is why other societies is a reason right
other societies use less medicines than
us but but it also sheds light on how we
Throw medicines we throw short-term
Solutions or alleged Solutions right
like medicines don't solve trauma right
can medicines help with symptoms can
medicines be in your corner as you go to
fight something if before trauma you
didn't have panic attacks and now
something happened and you're having
panic attacks well medicines can help
with that and that's a great use of
medicines but the idea that I'm going to
take stock of you and say you're a
person who has panic attacks I'll give
you medicine to not have panic attacks
and that's the end of the story has it
fixed anything right and that's why when
people don't get better which the system
then as though the person failed the
intervention right it's now we even use
that terminology like oh you failed this
kind of therapy you failed that kind of
medicine like how about we failed you in
how many ways and it's not reasonable to
think that that people would get better
by and large or on mass with the help
that we give them so we have all these
statistics right that tell us nothing
except the fact that we have a broken
system that isn't actually looking at
people if we invest in people in the
long term well people get better and
Society gets healthier right I mean we
know that from from the perspective of
Education right like early childhood
experiences trying to avoid Early
Childhood trauma getting education to
people at stages of life where they can
really take in uh the hope and and
possibilities of the future like we know
this makes sense it doesn't any less
make sense when we're talking about our
own health as individuals or as a
society okay so if I am um obese and I
come in and I'm I have a heart condition
the habits that I would put people on
exercise better diet uh looking at
biomarkers in order to make sure that
we're moving in the right direction like
uh body fat percentage uh blood sugar uh
lipids that kind of thing so it's it's a
pretty known Cascade of things that one
should do if somebody comes with trauma
is there a similar set of habits and
changes that they would need to make and
are there markers that are objective
that we can look at yeah so it's not
quite as straightforward as you know for
example taking blood and then you know
getting certain very clear biomarkers of
internal States and potentially of
biological change right but there are
absolutely markers and and the markers
become evident if you sit down and talk
with someone right so so one example can
be a defensive structure right we all
have defensive structures which which
Define like how do we navigate the world
like what do I have to arm myself
against the slings and arrows right of a
world that brings a lot of of difficulty
right and what we see sometimes is a
defensive structure that for example
changes after trauma right so one
example is one aspect of a healthy
defensive structure is sublimation so so
I'm feeling something that's very that's
distressing but inside I I want to turn
it into something that's productive
right so I I have I I feel like
aggression and some anger and
frustration in me and you know what I
can take that out in the gym and it
helps me be healthier right it's like
that that kind of thing right and you
can see oh if you and I are sitting down
and talking and you're coming right for
help right presuming that's why we're
sitting down and talking right and
you're telling me that you're depressed
I'm saying okay like I want to
understand the details cuz I don't know
anything from just that right now let's
say we start talking and I start
learning more about you and I see like
wow your defensive structure has really
changed and you're telling me about a
lot of adaptive ways of responding and
now maybe you're acting out more right
or maybe using a substance to soothe
right or maybe using denial or avoidance
and you know we start to see then oh
there's changes in a person look this is
not what happens all the time but the
vast majority of what I have taken care
of of over a long time over two decades
of doing this has been created by trauma
whether it's depression it's substance
abuse it's panic attacks it's
interpersonal violence right it's coming
from trauma so we don't always identify
traumatic change and it's not always
dramatic right it can be the
accumulation of smaller traumas like
denigration being seen as less than over
and over and over and over again but if
you really want to understand the person
you often learn exactly this like
defensive structure has changed change
the person is different they see their
hopes and Prospects in a different way
right and and and here's the key they
often don't know it trauma happens
changes their behavior but they're not
conscious of the change in Behavior well
changes us inside so like behavior is a
manifestation physically or like it are
we talking about it lays down new neural
Pathways or are you talking purely uh
either frame of reference which will
need to define or
behavioral true so behavior is just the
final manifestation right so the changes
we say are psychological you think okay
what does that mean right everything
that's psychological is biological right
I mean our psychology arises from our
brains our brains are composed of cells
and fluids and right they're the same as
the the rest of our bodies right we're
composed of neurons that are firing in
incredibly complicated ways across
incredibly comp complicated systems and
that changes right so so this is not um
a polyana assertion that like everything
is trauma and we're going to pay
attention to it and we're going to get
better it's based in hard science and
and I'll give you two examples so there
may be two Pathways I'm simplifying
right but but but it's this is really
kind of how it goes right where there
may be two Pathways inside of me if
something negative happens right to me
and one pathway could be like damn it
this not what I wanted but like I'm
going to bring myself to I'm going to do
it better right another pathway could be
like what a loser you are like you never
do anything right right look I've got
both Pathways inside of me right and
what
determines where the energy goes right
is is how the linkages are between the
neurons in those Pathways so if
something happens to me and I feel very
very bad about myself you know it starts
to Foster the negative Pathways right or
if I've said 500 times over you know
compared to 30 times down the other
pathways that I'm a loser what's wrong
with me like that's where the energyy is
going to go because those neuronal
linkages are stronger like it's it's
neurobiologically traceable right down
to what happens I mean we don't
understand it completely of course but
we understand the changes that happen
within us so yes it's psychological
because it's neurobiological and and
that's how it is behavioral it's
ultimately neurobiological then
psychological is a manifestation on top
of it and then that determines our
Behavior an example that is even more
Stark is that traumas can determine how
old we are okay so you may think like
what does that mean like my my birthday
is my birthday right okay your birthday
is your birthday in the sense that
you're always going to have a birthday
and we can always calculate forward and
say this is how old you are does that
really tell us how old you are by the
calendar it does but I don't really care
about the calendar compared to my body
right I mean my body's determining how
old I really am inside right and and
after major traumas there's there's
great research that shows us that
there's an increased Aging in cells you
know Research into tiir this aging
science right tells us that if you've
had very significant trauma the Cascade
of problems neurologically biologically
endocrinologically from the the top of
your head to the tip of your toe means
you know you might be 45 but really 52
right you might be 65 but really 70
right but that's real right that's true
if you look at at measures of Aging
without major trauma you can back map to
how old the person is basically right
but with major trauma that person got
older that very very terrifying and the
fact that um depression specifically I
don't know how linked it is to trauma
specifically but depression predicts an
increase in heart attack which is crazy
right so I I want to stay on this idea
of putting things in their place because
as I think about the habits that
somebody that has encountered a trauma
would need to imbue in their life me as
a lay person the things that I would
tell them to do would be uh first I want
to eliminate all the biological things
that might be causing this so you're
going to want to clean up your diet so
just going to the biological knock on
effect of shortening your lifespan
there's just realities to be faced
around inflammation would be a big one
so I'm going to Target things that cause
inflammation so stress is one of them so
let's get you meditating diet is another
let's clean up your diet which we'll
call whole food low sugar um getting
sleep getting sun exposure but the
tricky one and the one that is going to
keep you in business forever is how do I
conceptualize of the trauma and my role
in it you can reboot your life your
health even your career anything you
want all you need is discipline I can
teach you the tactics that I learned
while growing a billion- dooll business
that will allow you to see your goals
through whether you want better health
stronger relationships a more successful
career any of that is possible with the
mindset and business programs and impact
Theory University join the thousands of
students who have already accomplished
amazing things tap now for a free trial
and get started
today what I want to understand is you
you get somebody who's just had an acute
event in fact your your book opens the
intro to your book is written by Lady
Gaga and she said she basically woke up
in your presence and was like whoo I'm
being told I just had a psychotic break
and I assume from all the pressure of
Performing because I think it was while
she was on tour and in that moment how
do we begin obviously doesn't need to be
with her so you're not talking
specifically about a person but do we
first need to know exactly what happened
then do we need to know how they think
about what happened do they we need to
then understand how they think about
their role in what happened and so for
instance my instinct would be to get
somebody on CBT cognitive behavioral
therapy but I've heard you say that it's
maybe not the solution um so I'd love to
understand how
mechanistically how do we put things in
its place like what are the beliefs that
you try to imbue people with what I'll
call the frame of reference your beliefs
and your values essentially your beliefs
about yourself and the world your value
system about uh how you ought to be and
how the world ought to be would be the
only way I would know how to attack this
problem of getting people to put things
in the right place yes okay I will speak
to that but I if it's okay I'd like to
speak first to you had said okay there
are things you can do right like you can
get the basics right of start taking
better care of yourself right have a
better diet start exercising meditate
right and then the tricky one is this
the psychological one right but I would
argue because of this one they're all
tricky right it's not not easy to change
one's diet to rest better right
emul right you you have to think that
one you're worth it and you can achieve
it right and after traumas and again
it's not necessarily major traumas so it
can be the trauma of denigration over
time the trauma of being seen as less
than whether that's interpersonal abuse
in one household or it's it's societally
determined you know through how people
are seen and and can be then oppressed
through how they're seen so so it can be
dramatic it can be non-dramatic but it
doesn't matter like if the end point is
that that
person maybe doesn't see themselves as
worth taking care of or if they do think
oh maybe they're worth taking care of
it's not going to be okay anyway then
those things aren't going to happen and
that's very very common it's very very
common know when in the worst of my
traumas I still had my car serviced all
the time you know I I get my car
serviced every six months I want my car
to break down I want to take care of it
yet I was fogging myself into the ground
right because I valued the car more than
I valued
myself and that's not on do you mean
that literally or is that just like one
of those uh you're a conscientious
person and you know that you ought going
back to value system you ought to take
care of this thing that you spent money
on and it's just going to shorten the
LIF that feels like conscientiousness in
play more than that you actually value
it more than yourself I could be wrong
well so where the the conscious and the
unconscious right are different right
and it's the unconscious that matters
and if you had come to me in that state
of time and said hey do you care about
your car more than yourself I would have
said absolutely not like it's a thing
right but then it would have been
interesting right if if someone next you
maybe my My Future Self could have gone
back and said to myself well that's
interesting because you're behaving
exactly the opposite like you don't
actually care care more in the sense of
like care meaning something right cuz
you're not taking care of yourself
anywhere near like you're taking care of
the car so so what's conscious is
different from what's unconscious now
that's a period of time where I felt a
lot of responsibility for my brother's
death I felt like oh my God like I'm
depressed too and what's going to happen
to me and I couldn't see a future and my
brother died by Suicide and and after
that when I think about like that was a
period of time where I took way better
care of the car than myself and I would
have told you of course I wouldn't do
that as I was doing exactly that why
because I didn't think I was worth
taking care of I felt such a sense of
Shame over what had happened and what it
had how it impacted my family and then
also I thought even if I can get myself
to think well there are people who love
me who think I'm worth taking care of
like it's not going to be okay anyway
right he and I were very similar we look
similar we act acted similar in so many
ways and I I couldn't see how life was
could possibly be okay so this is the
evil of the trauma right that it takes
away the ability to to see ourselves for
what we're worth and also to see change
because I didn't think about myself that
way
before but I was not aware of there was
no curiosity in me or even awareness
that like whoa you it has all changed
like was it always true that you were
never worthwhile and you were never
going to get better were you wrong
before this did something change now and
you think differently you know I I ended
up getting myself some therapy which was
very very fortunate and I think it just
required if my memory recollects you
know is it was just basic therapy to
help me understand things because I
understood nothing when I finally got to
a desperate enough place to like call
the number on the back of the card and
Whisper that I needed some therapy
because I felt ashamed of that too so so
in order to get to the point
of how am I going to navigate my life
forward how am I going to understand
understand what's going on inside of me
we have to get over those initial
hurdles so I I I I didn't mean to not
address the question but I wanted to go
back to that you were talking about what
happens in therapy someone's sitting in
front of you but almost always not
always but almost always think about the
selection right for somebody to be
sitting across from me talking about
this right I mean they have to get there
right so so there has to be some thought
of you know I'm worth it I'll get myself
there maybe things will go okay people
don't always think that but but there's
so many people who are never sitting in
front of someone because our society
doesn't help or teach us what I think we
should be helped to understand and
taught even as far back as elementary
school right which is like how the
responses happen in us right and and how
we can change without knowing it we can
hide ourselves away and we can think
differently about ourselves but we don't
teach that so tragically what would we
teach how how would we teach them to
think
differently well we could engender a
curiosity about self
and we could teach directly so just one
example is bullying right like people
who are
bullied very very often the vast
majority of the time do not get any
education or understanding about like
what is going on right so that who is
doing the bullying like why why is that
person responding in ways that allow
that person to say feel powerful right
by belittling someone else right that
like there's something going on here
where the person who's doing the
bullying has some deficit of self right
and is trying to make up for the deficit
of self by uh because that person is a
foot taller being able to thump the
person who's not a foot taller right let
me ask you because this will get to the
heart of what I want to better
understand uh kid comes to you he's
being bullied do you send him to therapy
or
MMA well so I'm not a Child and
Adolescent psychiatrist I'll see people
as young as about 16 but but the best
guidance get a 25-year-old then that's
being bullied
what I want to is are we try to make the
person more courageous and more likely
to stand up to the bully or are we
trying to help the person look Inward
and um understand themselves because I
really want to get to the thing that
people need to do if they're in this
situation right well it very much
depends on the person right so so think
about there are people who could go to
MMA and learn a lot of defensive skills
that make them feel less afraid uh that
maybe let them self assert more in in
reasonable ways and like that's really
good for that person and if called upon
to defend themselves maybe they do it
better do better job of it than they
would have right but you could see how
other people would go to two MMA classes
and then get themselves killed by
confronting people right or utilize the
ability then to perhaps learn something
and be violent right to then enact The
Bullying I mean people do that too if
there's not enough self- knowledge right
so like who is the person what will they
gain from that right but understanding
ourselves better is always a good thing
right which is why that's what we're
we're trying to understand right it's
it's a process of trying to understand
oneself so we can understand not just
what is gone on in me but what are my
steps to changing that yeah that's why I
want to understand so what cognitive
behavioral therapy uh was a profound
find for me in terms of the sense of you
need to pattern interrupt so if you're
repeating something you talked about
this you become what you repeat if
you're repeating something negative you
have to pattern interrupt that you have
to one recognize that you're doing it
two you have to interrupt it and then
three I have found if you replace that
with something empowering you you just
feel differently in instantly and this
is uh to me this is all a game of
neurochemical management through the
adjustment of your frame of reference so
what you believe about yourself what you
believe about the world what you value
in yourself what you value think should
the world should value and so as you
take control of your thoughts which is
the very thing I would be trying to get
somebody to do you take control of your
thoughts and then you put in something
that allows them to recontextualize
themselves radically recontextualize
themselves so from victim to um hero I
don't know what the exact word to use is
there but certainly of your own life um
that feels like where we would want to
head but um
so before we get to the butt what's your
take on cognitive behavioral therapy is
it useful for this moment of getting
people to recontextualize themselves in
the trauma yeah so I'm not against
cognitive behavioral therapy I think it
is a great tool in certain situations
and it can be a great tool in
combination with other tools right but
it is not a substitute for understanding
and cognitive behavioral therapy it
happens to lend it itself to boundaries
around the therapy process so the idea
of okay we can package like 10 sessions
of CBT right for uh something that's
afflicting a person so okay 10 sessions
of CBT for depression right but you know
maybe depression is amenable to 10
sessions of CBT and it can get better in
some way but maybe that person needs
in-depth trauma work like where do
depression come from like what's the
manifestation of the depression there's
so much more to understand and the p
packaging of CBT as it's going to solve
all the problems really because the
packaging lends itself to Cost
Containment and throughput is a huge
problem right very often CBT is used to
polish the hood when you need to get
under the hood and look at what's in the
engine right and there are people who
can pretty readily back map like like
you said if you can use CBT to interrupt
negative thought processes right and
then you're inserting positive thought
process that you're not just making up
that are true right that that that then
call your attention to the to the facets
of you that are the ones you want to
feel proud of and you want want to
utilize going forward like that's great
but one you have to come up with that
what are you putting in its place why
are you putting in its place what does
it mean people can back map to that that
right I'm changing from a recurrent
self-denigrating negative thought that
has no place in my life to to
redirecting to what really I know is
true about me okay it may be that some
people can do that right but many people
don't right they they don't back map to
to the understanding from the CBT
process right so the idea is yes CBT is
a tool like there are many many many
tools and whatever we're doing if we're
in helping professions let's have all
the arrows in our quiver right and CBT
is a great Arrow to have in the quiver
it's not a substitute for understanding
it's not a solution to everything but
because it's packageable in a system
that values throughput and Cost
Containment it gets used for too
much okay that's very interesting um I
don't know if there are stats in this
but if you know I would love to know are
smart
people more or less likely to commit
suicide I don't know the answer I don't
know the answer in your practice what's
your guess who's more amendable to
treatment people because when you talk
about like understanding yourself and
all of that I worry that one of two
things is going to be true either people
that have a higher intellect are better
able to do that work or people that have
a higher intellect are more likely to
become neurotic and looping because they
can really understand deeply all the
ways that they're a terrible person um I
don't know which is true think I think a
reason I don't know the answer to that
is at least in my practice intelligence
has not been a a direct variable for
suicide so intelligence is important
like do I I want to understand how
intelligent someone is absolutely right
but it's not where the money's at so to
speak right what is the the predictor so
can a person connect with other people
is a person so lost in themselves at
times through depression through misery
uh through anxiety in many cases through
trauma are they are they in themselves
in a way
that is so blocked from connection with
others right is if you if you look at
how we help each other it's through the
people that we are right there have been
enough studies done showing that you put
a good person in the therapist seat that
person can help people through different
modalities right because they're doing
something more than oh I'm deploying
this modality that modality right
they're they're employing themselves
through a modality right but in in order
to do that it why why do that right
because you're trying to connect with
someone right and often what happens in
the therapy process is something called
positive projective identification which
is the idea that if you feel so ashamed
of yourself and so hopeless and so
afraid right that you're shut down
inside of yourself and we can develop
some Rapport and some trust and some
ideas and thoughts can pass between us
and my real and true belief that like
you can be okay like you're not cursed
you're life doesn't have to go down the
tubes like oh my God I see more
qualities about you than I could shake a
stick out that are great ones like if I
like I see that and I know that and I
learn that from you if we can be
connected then the person can take that
start taking that in right along with
understanding of you know if you didn't
feel ashamed of yourself before the
trauma and now you do let's talk about
why right that's not because you're weak
or because there's something wrong with
you it's because you're human right so
if understanding and Trust are built
then that positive projective
identification means means the person
takes in how you feel about them which
is how they can feel about them very
often how they did feel about themselves
now I didn't come out of the womb
thinking that my car was worth more than
me right and I didn't think that when I
was growing up you know there were
people who loved me I felt good about
myself and so so there was something in
me that I could then get back to like
right like you did feel differently
right but often we need help through
understanding measures and through human
connection measures that's what's
important if you tell me what do I want
to understand I would not ask ask you
give me three questions about somebody
and I'm trying to help and guide them it
wouldn't not it would not be how smart
are they or intelligent it wouldn't be
that but I I would certainly ask can
they are they empathically tuned can
they connect what are the other two
oh you know they would all be about
sense of self you know is this a person
who has had who has had stable
relationships over time right because it
tells you a lot about a person that like
they can connect they they can have a
give and take right it's you know I
don't know what exactly what those three
questions would be but I I'll tell you
they would they would be my best effort
to discern down to um understanding that
person's ability to have positive
internal States right I mean that's what
I would be looking for because that's
what would tell me where do I think at
least at first blush can I really help
you right or like am I really worried
where I I might think oh is this a
person who um who I might more direct
towards a higher level of care right
sometimes if I see someone and what's a
higher level of care so so maybe someone
who has who has suicidal thoughts and
I'm trying to understand like should
they go to a hospital or man can we
really do this outside of that setting
right and and a lot of that is
determined by do I feel like we can
really connect you know and and like
that's so important because that's what
makes all that's what makes all the
difference and it's not because you want
that person to like stay alive because
now you're their doctor so it's not that
right it's because someone else really
seeing us not recoiling from us you know
I I I had some surprise that that
therapist wanted to see me even though
like gosh this thing had happened that
was so awful and shameful like I
remember having thoughts like that and
you know how many people have said to me
like they're surprised that I don't
recoil when they tell me about the death
of their child when they tell me about
being raped when they tell me about
being denigrated and bullied over years
and they're surprised I don't recoil
because they've internalized the shame
of trauma and even someone not recoiling
let alone someone having just a human
reaction to my goodness right I'm so
sorry let's I want to help as best I can
right that makes a difference a huge
difference to people and it's that that
we want and need if we're going to
help that's maybe the most uh insightful
thing about trauma um I've heard the
idea that this really is is about
connection um I would love to hear and I
I fully understand this if we gave you a
week to think about it these would not
be the three questions but I'd love a
third question that helps you understand
somebody's internal State whether
they're capable of positive internal
States I would want to get at if that
person is aware of or in touch with the
goodness inside of them so do people
normally break down sobbing at that
point and say there is no goodness left
inside of me like I can just imagine
real trauma usually it's something not
asked directly right but if I were let's
say we're talking and I'm worried about
you right and I'm trying to understand
and I want to and I say okay gosh I see
that there's an ability to be empathic
right because we seem kind of connected
right and there's a warmth in you that I
can see when we're connected or even if
you're very sad or depressed you know
you're I can tell you're responding to
me in ways that read my affect and and I
sort of learn that about you right I
think okay there's something really POS
positive right and then I also then
learned that you've been able to have
some relationships over time okay these
are good factors right I wouldn't ask
directly about goodness in you but I
might say something like go you things
have been
so difficult right and when's the last
time like you really felt warmth or
helping from someone towards you or from
you towards someone else now I might be
interested in both ways but I'm most
interested in that moment maybe maybe in
that moment in have you are you able to
do things for others right because there
are people who see that they're they're
depressed they're terribly distressed
but they still understand inside of them
that they can do good things for others
you know they can still care for that
child uh they can still go do productive
work they can still volunteer somewhere
they still know that oh you know
somebody you know somebody felt the
grocery store and they broke something I
man it's terrible I help the person up
like okay you see that there's something
in you right and it's that awareness of
of goodness inside of oneself because
because like someone who doesn't feel
goodness they can see someone fall and
go the other way not because they're a
bad person but because they feel they're
going to make it worse if they get
closer like what I got to keep my
Badness away from that person I'll trip
and fall on them you know I mean you
know I'm putting words to something that
are just a feeling right but but I don't
think those those things are not
exaggerations after two decades of doing
what I do for a living like there are
real feeling States inside of us so I I
would want to understand that too
because if those three things are intact
then I'll be much more likely to feel
like okay we can we can have a plan we
can you know things things can go
forward it decreases my worry and also
in situations that might not be that
worrisome right for it might tell me
like I really think that things can be a
lot better you know I start to have a
read and I also while I'm we're having
that conversation I'm also coming into
some touch with what you know about
yourself right because there are plenty
of people who tell me about the
longitudinal friendships and family
relationships they have it over years
and years while they're telling me that
nobody cares about them and there's
nobody in their life right so so you
know you learn from what people overtly
say but don't rely on the part of the
iceberg that's above the surface of the
water which is also the message to the
person that's sitting at home like if we
don't just know ourselves by thinking
about ourselves it's not how it works
our brains don't work that way talk
right learn more through other means you
know that that's important because we
think we know everything about ourselves
it's often The Reflex shame it's the
reflex negatives that are telling us
that but that's not the truth all right
so somebody that really though does
believe that nobody loves them uh how
can you convince them
otherwise well we have to understand
their life like we have to to understand
that right like is that really
true sometimes it's true right I wrote a
story in the in the book that I wrote
about a person who had coutard syndrome
who thought he was dead yeah because no
one had cared for so long that he was
alive wow he was so just terribly sad
and he was gregarious and like funny and
nice and he exactly the guy you'd want
living next door to you right but he
just been alone for so long that was
true right now there's a different set
of things to try and do then not
everyone who isn't in in that place has
kotart syndrome and thinks they're dead
right I mean there ways we can start
talking about the goodness inside if I
remember from the book though you
weren't able to convince him that he was
alive no once person gets to that point
which is by and large through the
literature because it's a kind of case
one might see a couple times throughout
a a career right then it's very very
difficult once a person gets to that
point but it was an it's an extreme
example that's so enlightening about the
way the brain works I want to take a
second to linger on this so the book's
called trauma by the way read it
fantastic I think people think they're
misunderstanding what you're saying he
actually thought he was dead like he
knew hey I'm here I'm in your office but
he thought it was absolutely comical
like actually comical he thought it was
funny that you were trying to check his
heart cuz he's like I'm already dead
like what are you doing like when they
take me away to the morg you still going
to come and try to check my ha that's
really true yes but the punchline is
this guy never stops thinking he's dead
right and the fact that okay one if you
take an infant and deny them physical
affection they die which is already
weird but the fact that as an adult
you've already lived some enormous
portion of your life you know how the
world works
and you can become so profoundly lonely
that you end up believing you're dead
and your body hasn't caught up which I
don't even understand how they make that
logic work but they do that this happens
enough that there's a name for the
syndrome right that's by it's not
logicas it doesn't work in logic right
mean I'm dead and I'm talking to you and
have a
heartbeat that's logically impossible
what do they would you let them listen
with the stethoscope to hear their own
heart no because logic doesn't matter
when logic runs up against strong
emotion right like logic never ever ever
wins so logic says hey you're alive I
mean you got a heartbeat you're talking
you're you you're having lunch right um
but if emotion says that you're dead it
doesn't matter what logic says never
does it it's never logical to run into a
burning building but if someone you love
is in it you know people run right in
right like logic doesn't matter when
emotion is stronger those feel very
different to me so I will say that frame
of reference is what makes the person
run into the burning building because
they like you said they love somebody
inside of it or they want to be the kind
of person that runs towards danger to
help other people like that I get now
off camera we were talking about frame
of reference frame of reference for me
is very much a mix of biology so
Evolution and your own beliefs that
you've taken control of so I think that
one's very much an interplay of we
probably have an instinct to protect
people in our tribe already or certainly
our family and then on top of that if
you layer like that's the kind of person
I want to be um I can see why somebody
would do that but qard syndrome where
your brain is trying to understand why
you are profoundly alone it is trying to
understand why it is in just a profound
amount of pain and it suddenly goes oh
I'm dead and I don't know if it reaches
for that because it's even more painful
to think you're Unworthy of Love or it's
even more painful to think I have chosen
to live my life in a way that's so d
forgive me I know the audience is
freaking out right now but that this is
what I'm saying they would have to think
that I've lived my life in a way that's
so dumb no one wants to be around me and
I can't bear to take responsibility for
that and instead the brain instead of
embracing those very simple
straightforward Solutions or reasons it
says oh you're dead that that to me is
an insight about how the human mind
works that anybody that wants to live
life well needs to understand that's
what you're up against that's how weird
your mind is that like one of my
favorite stories if you destroy
somebody's ability to generate uh
long-term memories so like the movie
momento you walk into the room this a
real study you walk into the room you
meet this person doctor puts a pin in
their hand they shake their hand it
pokes them it hurts they jerk their hand
back why'd you do that they leave the
room they come back the person the
patient does not remember meeting them
they reintroduce themselves they stick
out their hand to shake it the person
won't take their hand right but they
don't remember why but when you ask them
they will make up a reason they will say
oh people that wear white lab coats I
never shake their hands I don't shake
hands on Tuesdays whatever the brain
will make up the most ridiculous reasons
and I don't think that this only happens
when you get all the way to card
syndrome I would say people are dealing
with this all the time your brain is
coming up with the dumbest possible
reasons and we are blind to it we don't
realize it's our brain making shut up
yes it is happening all the time but the
similarity so so I I would argue that
there is uh a very strong lesson to take
forward from the burning building
example the cotard's example and the
example you just gave of the person who
doesn't uh doesn't make long-term
memories right which is that logic does
not matter when it comes up against
strong emotion right so really strong
affect feeling and emotion limic things
there's logic things in our brain and
lyic things which are basically about
emotion right so in the first example
the burning building example the idea is
to the reason I use that example is to
make it something very immediate and
very strong there's not time like you
see the burning building right there's
not time like what kind of person do I
want to be like that's a logical process
that the brain does not have time to do
right logic says building burning run
other way emotion says person I love
inside run towards right it's like it's
that's what that happens very very
rapidly what logic said do says does
doesn't matter and the person runs
towards the building right in the
cotard's example it gets more
complicated because there's there's
actually a um there's a verbal construct
right there's an idea of I am dead right
so the thought is then okay how does a
person logically come to that like I
must be dead because I haven't lived a
good life or and it just no it's like
the logic doesn't matter the person
believes that they are dead because they
feel dead inside of themselves they
can't find any life right if if life
comes from the prison is a memory of
like what what ises feeling alive feel
like like for example this this man had
a memory of like being a kid and like
people holding him like he knew that
existed right but he didn't have it in
an adult in his adult life for years and
years and years and and he didn't have a
pet he didn't like oh I can I can love a
an animal right for various reasons he
was just alone and then the life drained
out of him so so the question I mean I
think the ontological question about
cotard syndrome is was he really dead
right if if that was all gone the things
that make you feel alive then is it
really true that there's no life in him
in the way that matters like in the in
the limic emotional way I feel no life
right is that more powerful than oh my
heart you know my heart stops beating
you know you I mean my heart stops
beating so I die so what is actually
going on there is is the the Primacy of
emotion inside over logic and he might
say he was gregarious he was fun so
there was life in him but he couldn't
see it he couldn't anchor to it so his
feeling of I am dead because nothing
happens but he could be socially fasile
he didn't feel it inside so in the sense
that most matters he was right d That's
the most brutal thing I've ever heard
anybody say that is so gnarly when I was
reading the book I was like God damn now
I can't help but be fascinated so if I'm
right that this ultimately is about
radical
recontextualization that you have to get
the person who believes nobody loves
them or that they are unworthy to uh if
it's based on trauma to re understand
the trauma and so in this Casa in this
guy's case the trauma is very slow it's
a very slow long duration drip of just
nothingness uh could we give him MDMA
and take him to
uh a old folks home I don't know
somewhere where there's going to be
people that would be so excited to talk
to him and suddenly it's like oh my God
I feel so connected to these people and
I can share my wisdom and they can share
theirs and whoa like they're hungry for
my attention I'm hungry for theirs could
we get them a puppy uh like would there
be a way even if it had to be
pharmacological where we could change
his state so dramatically that he would
feel alive again like don't you secretly
want to kidnap this guy and find out
sure absolutely do you think it would
work if we did the MDMA old folks home
puppy combo I think
yes I cannot imagine that it wouldn't
work in somebody so isn't it worth
trying with everybody right I met this
man in the hospital a day in the
hospital cost a lot of money he's in the
hospital for a long long time but I had
no ability to do anything except give
him two weeks of medicines when he left
I couldn't prescribe attach him to an
old folks home they they will make his
life better and he will make their life
better right get him a puppy let's get
him out in the let's get him out in the
world have somebody go and talk to him
all the time like I he could talk a lot
when I sat down with him I just didn't
have time to do it for for long let's do
that but we couldn't do any of that we
could spend thousands upon thousands of
dollars having him in a useless Hospital
stay but but we weren't going to do
anything to actually help him so we just
sent him home to the same loneliness
that he came from could we do better
than that yes is it shameful some shame
is is warranted is it shameful as a
society that we do not
yes so coming back to the guy with
short-term memory loss the doctor with a
pin in his hand they greet doesn't
remember but he still comes up with a
logical explanation what is the the
unifying thread there if I'm
understanding correctly it's just that
when you have such a strong emotion
everything else just pales in comparison
right so so think about that what an
amazing example it is right if I can't
make long-term memories and we meet and
shake hands and there's a pin in your
hand like that feels bad right logically
I might think I'm got to okay I see who
you are and like I'm not going to trust
you anymore right so okay but as soon as
you walk out the door the logic goes out
the window right that's why you know
that what seems like a ridiculous was
called confabulation oh I don't trust
people in white lab codes or it's
Tuesday and I don't you know the person
saying something we say it's a
ridiculous explanation or is it that it
just totally doesn't
matter right what's the difference of
why right I know what I need to know the
logic doesn't matter the emotion tells
me what to know which is don't shake
your hand the last time that hurt right
so think about that even the backmapping
to a ridiculous logical explanation
doesn't really matter because the logic
doesn't matter what matters is the
feeling right all right radical
recontextualization we put drugs on the
table certainly talk therapy um this
feels like it's just an incredibly
nuanced difficult thing to do but I
would love to know if there is a
standard procedure to get somebody who
does not
believe who doesn't believe the things
that would allow them to have a positive
internal State again how do you get them
back moving in the direction of that
without drugs first and then we'll get
into your thoughts on how drugs can be
useful well the first step is assess
like do they need drugs right like
sometimes if people are very very
depressed or having three panic attacks
a day and I can't we can't do the
therapy part together right so so with
the presumption being the drugs aren't
needed right which most of the time
they're not we don't need medicine most
of the time to get that person to a
place where they can act access their
internal state right then we come at it
again the idea is to have all the arrows
in the quiver right which is why you
you're referencing some of the novel
medication arrows right in pathogens and
psychedelics and we're learning so much
more about how can they help us right
but even putting that aside we're now
thinking about the therapy arrows right
there are different routes of approach
to different people right some people
are very intellectualized right and then
I might say okay the next time we're
meet going to meet I might think or
might say to you let's like really talk
about how it works you know like it's
it's like super interesting right like
how our brains and our brain biology
works that like tells us often how we
feel right like so so you're telling me
like how just awful and ashamed of
yourself you feel and how different and
like right I felt the same way right
because we're human right so like let's
talk about all this human stuff that
goes on inside of us and person might
like really love that right because when
it's true it's real and it starts to
chip away at like I feel this way
because there's something wrong with me
or there's something bad about me right
there may be other people who are not
interested in that at all not able to
follow that at all and then I might
choose a very very different route right
so if you're telling me for example that
you're unlovable right then I might be
interested okay I'm I'm thinking in my
head from some of what you told me and
you know you did say something you said
some positive things about in elementary
school like right so something me like
feel around that more and then maybe
you're going to start telling me about
you know some teacher who was like so
lovely to you like so supportive even
though things were awful at home like
now you're telling me that you are not
unlovable right but I'm getting there
through curiosity right it's going for
what will be most helpful based upon who
that person is because what am I trying
to do is come at ultimately the false
premise right that you're either cursed
or unlovable or things will never go
well or things go well in all facets of
your life but it will never be that way
professionally or things go that way in
all facets of your life but you'll never
have good romance like we're trying to
come at false lessons and there going to
be different routes of how to get there
different Maps right for different
people depending upon the idiosyncrasies
of them and of what's happened to them
but it sounds like at least um I have an
emerging understanding that there is
some universals at play here which is uh
trauma leads people to get into a point
where they no longer believe the things
they need to believe in order to have a
positive internal experience that in
order to get them back there I am going
to have to find a way to get them to
connect with other people and it seems
like extreme isolation is always going
to be bad that there really isn't which
I wanted there to be but I whatever is
true is true uh I really wanted there to
be a way where somebody even by
themselves even if nobody ever wraps
themselves around them that they would
be able to um leverage their frame of
reference in order to build a new belief
system about the M themselveses the
world and values such that they could
earn their own respect and get moving in
a positive direction right but it's some
people can right some people can do that
many cannot so do we leave behind the
many who cannot I mean it's a societal
choice right some people can do what you
just said but it's a tall order you can
be pretty smart and pretty worldly and
have a lot of friends and a lot of
resources and totally not be able to do
that let's talk about San Francisco so
San Francisco is and look I'm on the
outside of this I'm a headline reader I
want want to be very clear uh but having
said that it looks like compassion gone
wrong it's when you societally just want
good things for people you want to love
them uh but you never hold them
accountable you never ask them to do
anything and so instead of saying stop
doing drugs on the street you give them
clean needles and I get why that feels
like a compassionate thing but it seems
to create more people on the street
doing drugs not less well the idea of
giving someone something without any
accountability that's not that's not
compassion right that's
self-indulgence right compassion helps
people but it also helps them help
themselves right even if you're just
kind to somebody in the moment like you
hope they'll take that kindness away
even if you're not going to see them
again right so so clean needles
absolutely can be compassion right if
it's one reduction of suffering right
maybe so so needles that are dirty
spread illness and illness can spread to
other people who haven't used the needle
right so so there can be broader
societal reasons right there can also be
look we want to help you
not get an illness that you might not
recover from right while we're also
trying to help you take a path where you
don't have to be on the drug right so so
it's like what is actually being done
for someone right if what's being done
for something is something that feels
good for the doer even if that doer is a
society in the short term then that is
is self-indulgence and you might say
well if it puts a roof over someone's
head for a night okay great yeah that's
better than the roof not being over
their head for a night but does it
really matter when it's not there the
next night right I mean real compassion
helps people help themselves right it
doesn't just leave them flat and I think
that's the difference in a lot of what
we do like think it fits with the
short-term mentality of I did something
for you right like I was compassionate I
feel better about myself it fits with
the rapid throughput with the you know
four to five patients in an hour for the
internal medicine or family practice
doctor and overuse of medicines right
because we don't stop and stand back
right I mean the thought was we have a
medical system that's spending how many
thousands of dollars a day to
hospitalize my poor patient with qard
syndrome we're going to we're going to
buy him a dog too right but maybe we
could have saved like 95% of that money
and done what he needed right it would
help others but like we have to have a
conception that doesn't have this kind
of narrowness of blinders on and sees
people in a societal context sees our
health in its psychological personal and
societal context whether it's physical
health and mental health and if we don't
do that the narrow frame of reference
all those blinders on uh combined with
Cost Containment and throughput ends up
it ends up with good throughput right
but it's not making people healthier and
it's ultimately not containing costs
it's very interesting I want to go back
to isolation in the book you talk about
um there was a guy that was in solitary
confinment for 20 or 25 years I mean was
something absolutely
outrageous what does somebody who's had
that kind of isolation what happens the
the story I think was was actually
someone who one might have thought from
all the socialization would have taken a
different path than he than he took he
took a path of kindness and help when
absolutely everything he'd been taught
would tell him to do exactly the
opposite so that that was a story of
actually like that there can be human
Beauty even when Society has pushed so
far against it and of course he bore
responsibility for many of the decisions
in his life so I'm not taking
responsibility away from him but he
still found goodness and made a really
big difference in someone's life and
then was so happy with himself because
he he hadn't hurt anybody in fact quite
the opposite he'd really helped someone
the the idea of someone who's in
solitary confinement for so long and
again this isn't the place to try and
think about what are the criminal
justice elements and all but really what
you're talking about is isolation and
other than certain States or conditions
that that are sort of clinically
relevant but not found that often right
basically if we put those things aside
we are not built to be alone and to be
isolated right we are built to be
interconnected and you know that's
always been an issue for humans one way
or another are we too interconnected and
then that there's more conflict between
us or can we be on top of one another
but not interconnected like you know the
aloneness that people describe in big
cities where you know people are amongst
other people with alone so so you know
there are many ways in which this can
occur geographically or psychologically
even if not geographically but
ultimately it is about having connection
right it is about feeling connection and
if you're deprived of that for one
reason or whatever the reason may be if
you don't have it in your life we begin
to lose what what animates us you know
we're built to be generative right we're
built ultimately to try and make things
better in the world around us it's why
we can nurture children and and you know
if we see a child on the street we can
help someone else's child too like there
many many ways in which we're built to
be interconnected and to make the world
around us better and if someone takes
that away from you right that is awful
probably I've often thought that my
patient with card syndrome was so
gregarious right if he were built with
less of that you know and say he felt
uncomfortable around people I don't know
maybe this wouldn't have happened what
do I know right maybe he would have read
a lot of books and felt some sense of of
living through you know Adventures he
was reading I don't know but but he
wasn't built that way like you know this
was a guy who like loved seeing me each
day just as he loved ribbing me about
the waste of my time like he was built
for something he he didn't get for far
far far too long which is why he didn't
feel alive it's like it's never good to
have that isolation from Human
connection and from Human goodness right
flowing from one and two one all right
did you see the movie
uh Cast Away I did not oh my God you
have to see this movie so I don't see
enough movies I know I said I'm G to say
no to that and you're go no but the
great news is should you make the time
you have a real treat so uh Tom Hanks
plays a character who ends up getting
stranded on a deserted island and he is
isolated if I remember right for 5 years
okay and it's really fascinating as a
screenwriter you have to find a way to
make that interesting and so a character
not talking it's just going to be way
harder for them to show emotion it's
going to be harder for the audience to
really latch on and pay attention so
they come up with a really great gimmick
which is that um he ends up there's a
volleyball that washes a Shore with him
CU he's in a FedEx plane that crashes
and so a bunch of the FedEx items wash
up one of them is a volleyball and he
ends up putting a a like print on it to
make it look like a person and gives it
like a smiley face and he ends up
talking to it and really developing a
relationship with it and while that
almost certainly was created as a device
for the screenwriter to find a way for
Tom Hanks to do something that the
audience could relate to it's also
pretty insightful in terms of what you
would need to do to keep your sanity if
you're in isolation and so I'm wondering
if you knew somebody was going to be on
a desert island or unfortunately maybe
more likely in solitary confinement what
are things that they could do so reading
let's say that that's off the table is
journaling something like talking to
yourself uh remembering positive
memories like how would you have a
person make themselves resilient to
isolation I'll answer that but I got to
say I swear this is true when you said
the movie Cast Away an image came to my
mind which was Tom Hanks holding that
volleyball right and they say okay I'm a
psychiatrist so that's maybe the that's
exactly the image that would come to my
mind I think that a reason for that
maybe that was publicized and all but
but also because when I think about like
Cast Away and person lost on a deserted
island I think the lack of human
connection like that's what's most
important right like the volleyball is
so important right because that's
perhaps how the person survived by being
able to conceive of and in a sense bring
to life and other right which is why
journaling which when we're writing and
or speaking there are different things
that happen in our brains that reify
like kind of make things more real so it
is good to talk or to write as opposed
to just thinking and it's good to keep
alive in a sense in a very real sense
the people that we've taken inside of us
right so to sit and imagine people
people that are close to you that you
won't be seeing on the deserted island
or in solitary confinement right if if
you had a good experience on making this
up with your sister growing up like
think a lot about her call her to mind
evoke her right evoke you when you were
with her as a child evoke you as you are
now right keep real yourself as a person
and others keep it real in words you may
say to yourself in words that you may
write the same way a person keeps know
track of time we have to keep a
structure right I remember reading at
one point uh Nelson Mandela describing
right what he had you know what was it
like you know trying to survive and to
try and keep some sense of the passage
of time and so we need a structure
around the passage of time and the
passage of days we also need a structure
inside about who am I and what's the
constellation of the world in which I
live in and and when I read things like
that I'm also aware that the person is
describing a rich inner life right and
and they may not be describing like I
really cult ated my rich inner life
because that's how I didn't lose myself
but the person automatically is is doing
that right and that's how they're
keeping life inside of them when
ostensibly life has been taken away from
them I mean again not their physical
life but but life as we as we live it
amongst other people brought up Nelson
Mandela uh I want to tie him to Victor
Frankle and the wife of um Tom hanks's
character and Cast Away so you talked
about calling forth people so there's
two things at play there's other people
in human connection and that has been I
think the biggest theme that we've
talked about today is the absolute
crushing need for that but there's also
meaning and purpose the two most
impactful books probably that I've ever
read are man search for meaning by
Victor Frankle and Long Walk to Freedom
by Nelson Mandela uh both of whom I
don't know that I am uh impressive
enough to do what they did like I I
stand in awe of what they survived in a
way that scares me for my own weakness
and I don't know if I could pull it off
I want to believe how does one put
meaning to their life how does one put
meaning to their suffering and how does
meaning play with trauma and is that
part of this Grand
makes you think that you are cursed or
that nothing will ever work or that you
will only be continually hurt I could
list the Litany of things I've heard
over 20 years for the next several hours
that that tells a person you don't get
to have meaning you can't have meaning
meaning is not for you right it crushing
you use the word crushing that's the
right word to put to it we need meaning
and meaning is is
not described or contained in the way we
are often in a classical sense
contextualize people the idea that there
are drives in us that there is an
aggressive or self- assertion drive and
there's a pleasure drive or a a relief
from suffering drive so so the thought
that like look I want food and shelter
and I want to be able to reproduce and I
I want someone to be there to take care
of me if I make it to be older and
they're limited resources and I have to
I have to fight for that right that's
what the idea that there are those two
drives would would tell us but that
doesn't explain at all Victor Frankle or
what Victor Frankle wrote it does not
explain at all Nelson Mandela or what
Nelson Mandela wrote I don't know about
Tom Cruz's character's wife in castleway
I'm presuming she wasn't a volleyball so
I don't that I'll have to learn more
about but but but look I presume it's
along the same lines of like you you
have to make meaning and feel meaning
and and Trauma can take that away and
that's resilience and perseverance like
these things are so important and we
don't have an understanding or an answer
to them you know there was a joke I
heard at times in my training which was
that if you find the resilience Gene go
right to Stockholm right but there isn't
of course go right col no priz but but
the joke was like there's not a
resilience Gene right like it's a
complex constellation of of genetic
factors and nurture factors and early
childhood experience is so important and
you know neurochemical factors are like
there's so much there right but that's
like the magic of humans who survive and
thrive amidst adversity right it's
resilience and we can't help to engender
resilience in people people find
resilience through meaning right and I
think that's the message of those books
right of the the great thinkers right is
we we have to have meaning in order to
persevere to be resilient like you know
every morning people in the
concentration camp had to get up right
they to wake up and realize they were
there there has to be an attachment to
meaning beyond the self that could be
other people or it could be God or
something greater than self but we can
help people have that meaning do we do
nearly enough to help people have that
meaning no we sent my patient home from
the hospital with coutard syndrome alone
with no plan for anything other than to
be alone so no we're not helping people
in the way that we need to so that
trauma it can be other things too but in
my very strong opinion by and large
trauma drives people to places of
feeling no meaning and therefore no
worth and and often therefore no drive
to continue so how do you help people
ascribe meaning to trauma is probably
the most important thing something very
bad has happened to them and they have
to put it in its
place how do you do it how do you put
meaning to something well first we have
to look at the truth of it right and the
truth very often is that just something
really bad has happened right that that
abuse and denigration coming through the
lens of prejudice is real right the
death of that person is real the injury
is real and we need to honor that now
can there be a silver lining so to speak
of of negative things yes there can be
and that's not a polyana statement to
make and when people make it in a
polyana way we'll turn this good there
nothing to get someone who who suffered
bad trauma to recoil from you more than
saying that like we have to acknowledge
that it's bad right there's nothing good
about having been abused or denigrated
like there's nothing good about this
right it's bad but we can see it for
what it is and for what it means and
what it doesn't mean someone really hurt
you there's shame there but the shame is
on the person who hurt you not you right
let's see it for for what it really is
and then we can move forward and we can
make something good right has good come
my brother's suicide I think it has was
a huge part of why I went to medical
school and I like to think I've helped a
few people along the way and that it's
made me it's allowed me to maybe be a
more compassionate person than I might
otherwise be all of my other flaws and
false aside right they like it's done
something for me and allowed me to do
something for others that doesn't mean I
think my brother's suicide was a good
thing and I have to be able to see that
and understand that and then I have to
be able to see it for what it is and
what it isn't do you knowingly say I'm a
describing this meaning to that as a way
to
um give it meaning feel better like I
for me to really acknowledge the mental
Jiu-Jitsu helps I don't want to be
oblivious to it I want to say okay this
really horrendous thing has happened I
want to be hyper aware of my response I
want to be hyper aware of the tools that
I need to deploy I need to find meaning
to this I need to ascribe meaning to
this um do you do that
do you mean with myself or with others
yeah with your brother's suicide just to
be really Point Blank you were saying I
like to think but I'm saying do you do
you spend time attaching that to that
and saying I went to medical school
partly because of my brother I have
helped people uh in his name I don't
know if that's how you think of it
but yes yes I I do think that right I do
think okay what were the sequele of that
event right sequele I don't what came
after it like okay the event happens it
consequences is all negative right so
what so it's what were the downstream
effects of it what happened after it
right and there were things that
happened that in the clarity of
hindsight I can see were just very bad
right and they LED bad
places then there are things that I can
see LED good places like for example it
gave me some freedom to go do something
I wanted to do so I did want to help
people but I also all of a sudden felt
very naked in terms of knowledge of The
Human Condition and I thought I went to
college and I've been out and about in
the world and all of a sudden I was like
oh my God I don't understand anything I
felt so afraid and vulnerable so part of
my drive was to learn and experience and
make myself safer part of my drive was
to be helpful to others but I put so
much pressure on myself that I would
never have gone back to school and
thought hey are going to you know people
were telling me when I left my job like
whoa like you're not going to you know
you're not going to have a real income
for 10 years and like people are saying
things it's scared me right and that
that would have scared me too much
before but it gave me permissiveness of
like look I'm alive and I'm and I'm
healthy enough to go do this why would I
not try doing it right it emboldened me
in a way maybe some of that was through
desperation a desire to make meaning at
the time I didn't fully understand it I
knew some of those things but in
retrospect you know hindsight can be a
lot closer to 2020 if we think and
explore ourselves which I haven't done
this all on my own I mean I've had
wonderful therapy I I'll thank Gregory H
who's been my therapist now for 12 years
for helping engender Insight in me and
and help me to be able to do this and
say hey there's a life narrative in me
in which meaning has been made and
goodness has been made of something that
I see as bad and
negative okay so we can obviously find a
path to reconnecting to other people
when something has happened in the past
we can find a way to ascribe meaning to
something that happened in the past how
do you help somebody who is under
tremendous pressure right now it's it's
an ongoing trauma and I think it's
useful to focus on an ongoing trauma
that one chooses so this is born of Lady
Gaga and um her break and I'm very
curious when you look at that are you
like you need to retire like this is too
much or are you going here's how we
become either more resilient or more
courageous or whatever I'm assuming it's
it's more mental Jiu-Jitsu it's it's a
reframe but what does that look like as
somebody and I'm asking I'm not asking
for a friend I'm asking for myself as
somebody that like really wants to push
the envelope of what is possible what I
will routinely run up against are my own
limitations so I'm always trying to push
my limitations a little bit further out
become more resilient be able to handle
more one do you just advise people like
that stop you're just going for too much
or are there tactics that one can deploy
to think about it a new to be able to go
farther right we hopefully what what I
can engage someone in is a premise we
can both agree on right so look if your
life is overwhelming like things aren't
going to be okay right it's a pretty
straightforward premise um if you're
overwhelmed like you're not going to
navigate forward in a way that gets you
what you want so if we can agree about
that and sometimes it takes a little
time right but if we can agree about
that then we can look at okay how and
why is your life overwhelming right
maybe what you're
doing you could actually do quite well
and quite readily if you took better
care of yourself in other ways right if
you you know exercise diet you know
different choices about life structure
so maybe we need to look at that that
what you're feeling overwhelmed by
doesn't have to be overwhelming for you
but are you taking care of yourself
right maybe you are taking really good
care of yourself in the sense of feeding
and watering and sleeping and all of
those things of self right but look it's
just unreasonable right what you're
trying what you're foisting on yourself
given I'm very very fortunate that I get
to see so many people who are very high
achieving they have very high distress
tolerance now it's wonderful to have
high distress tolerance in many many
many ways but that's also the person who
can take on way way way way way too much
right and like look I don't care how
capable a person is there aren't 30
hours in your day right there aren't you
know there aren't even 25 in your day
right so sometimes there has to be like
why is it that you would be asking more
of yourself than is of yourself than is
possible right and we're not talking
about like can you stretch yourself and
be at your best right we're talking
about things just make no sense like you
know nobody can do that right and that's
why oh people who try and do that the
outcome isn't good you know we we we see
that so we have to be R we have to look
at it because you know logic is also
very important right we have to
understand like what are you actually
doing right like why are you overwhelmed
we have to understand that growing a
business is hard and if you're in the
thick of it you know that as your
business grows new challenges will be
coming at you from every conceivable
angle netsuite is the number one Cloud
Financial system streamlining accounting
financial management inventory HR and
more manage risk get reliable forecasts
and improve your margins right now you
can download netsuite's popular kpi
checklist designed to give you
consistently excellent performance
absolutely free netsuite.com
Theory we learned earlier in the
interview here that the logic doesn't
matter me anybody else is driven by
emotion primarily so in fact do you
think of um somebody who is hyper driven
do you just assume that they're pushing
back against a trauma
like often not always but but think
about here is again is how logic is
subservient to emotion right right if
you come in and tell me I'm overwhelmed
and I just can't take it anymore right
okay you're telling me something right I
want to understand it better right then
let's say we're talking and you're going
to tell me things I can understand
through logic well how many hours do you
sleep I ask you that okay do you how are
you eating are you exercising who's in
your life are you taking care of
yourself are you drinking too much I
start learning about it right and you're
going to tell me we're going to exchange
information based upon logic and here's
what often happens the person uses logic
in a wonderful way that that conveys all
the details and tells us a story but but
all of that is wrapped up right and and
has like the blanket of of where emotion
right a effect that lyic stuff drives a
person right so you may very very very
logically tell me why you have to have
30 very very busy hours in your day or
you're not good enough right I'm like
okay I I mean we have to understand the
logic to understand how we're going to
come at that but the premise is driven
by something that's emotional otherwise
the logic would say hey I should stop
that right I mean I'm a very capable
person and I'm very driven but there's
like there's only so far right you know
by the way the last three times I did
this you know twice I ended up in the
hospital like you know why would logic
not say to behave differently it's
because logic matters in the details of
all of it we need to know that but logic
doesn't matter in the drive so then I
become curious and I wish for you to be
curious about why is it that you have to
be more than human right like why is it
that what you is a very capable person
in this example or why is it that that
what you can do in 24 hours if you're
really taking good care of yourself
isn't enough or why is it that you think
you can be extremely productive and
still feel okay when you're not taking
care of yourself you know so then we
it's the
emotion that that the emotional part
that's driving everything but we need to
understand the logic within that in
order to say okay like we have to have
communication back and forth of us of
information and decide how we're going
to come at
it interesting okay so um I may not be
the best example on this because so in
fact I'll give you my breakdown of what
I do I have a a stance around overwhelm
that I teach my students all the time
which is I don't do
overwhelm and what I mean by that is not
that I have infinitely strong shoulders
though I I am constantly trying to push
how much weight I can carry comfortably
but I'm very pragmatic about one's
biological needs so my thing is I'm
never going to do things that cause me
to lose sleep if I'm losing sleep then I
know immediately that I have to change
something so what I tell myself is doing
less is always an option so if I'm
starting to feel that rev up where I can
feel my mind it's it's starting I I
don't even like saying overwhelm uh
because I have such an identity of I
don't do overwhelm but when I can feel
that state that leads most people to
becoming overwhelmed uh I do what I call
downshifting so I force my mind to slow
down so I don't think oh what more can I
do what more can I take on I think how
do I relax how do I slow down what do I
eliminate um because doing less is
always an option and so I'm very careful
not to build my self-esteem around being
able to do more um because that's a very
dangerous game but what what I'm really
fascinated by is so you have a high
performer like Lady Gaga but the thing
that freaks me out about her life that I
recognize in myself would be a danger is
the bigger stage you play on the more
sense of like hey these people maybe
they got a babysitter they came out they
spent a ton of money to be at this
concert and now I need to perform and to
um there are all these promoters and
managers and everything they're all
counting on me to do more show dates and
so and also I'm I just know that not one
singer ahead of me ever has lasted
forever right everybody goes away kids
today don't even know Michael Jackson is
so it's like right so no matter how big
you are just poof gone so there's a
sense of making hey while the sunshines
and so there's all these sort of innate
pressures and to me to play the game
well it it isn't just to do less it is
also to figure out how you can do more
without distressing yourself so you want
to push your tolerance you want to make
sure that you don't value yourself for
the amount that you can do and you uh
also want to know that doing less is
always an option so it's it's this
really interesting
thing but when I look at other people
that have achieved way more than I've
achieved I'm just like whoa like they
they have either burned themselves out
in a way that I'm not willing to or they
have figured out how to press that um
their Breaking Point farther away and so
when I hear a story like lady go goes I
secretly I'm over here like I want you
to tell me that you have some secret
formula where she can just reframe hey
you can't worry about what other people
think or whatever hopefully not that
right and now you can like play on the
biggest stage ever that's secretly what
I want to hear yeah and and here again I
know I keep saying this but it's is so
important it's all personalized like who
is that person so just one example you
said like sleep is inviable for you
right like you can't change the sleep
right so you know yourself well enough
to know that right for me I can change
the sleep but there are other things I
can't change right so it's like know
thyself right because that's how we know
how to take care of ourselves and
understand ourselves so then beyond
those kind of maybe more basic or
mechanical parameters right we then look
the interesting part are the intangibles
about the person right so so for example
very high distress tolerance high levels
of conscientiousness and high levels of
empathy or empathic Attunement is
wonderful right right but boy doesn't
that create a liability right like
there's another side of everything right
every good thing can be too much of that
good thing can be harmful to that person
so that's the person who's going to see
like there's more for me to do people
want more of me there's more good to do
right and and because there's a high
level of distress tolerance that person
can overextend themselves way more than
the vast majority of people can and
they're in a setting often that
facilitates that that says right right
more is better that's thinking more
about that than the person then the
person's conscientious right wants
everything to be great right and they're
empathic they understand how people feel
and how they make them feel and and that
is a recipe for the person being so
well-meaning and wanting to take care of
themselves which is pushing themselves
farther than they can be pushed and
that's where the lesson often that I I
find that I'm bringing to people who
have high distress tolerance are
conscientious are empathic and are in
the public eye in a way that they can do
a lot of good you know they can do a lot
of good through their presence in the
world just just one example right they
tend to get themselves overwhelmed
because they're trying to do more than a
human can do right and and then what
we're talking about is like human
standards do apply like this is a very
very capable human but like you have to
allow yourself humanness right so now
we're coming at that right is it true I
mean sometimes we I'm saying is it true
that you have to be more than human to
be okay right and I at times will be
saying that to someone now that might be
someone who has wealth and fame and
wants to do certain things that to to
make the world better it may also be the
person who is quietly toiling away you
know taking care of five kids and has a
job in a home to take care of and you
know and feeling bad about themselves
because they can't shoulder it all
because no human can right so so the
limits of humanness and recognizing
works against shame right because if you
think you're supposed to be more than
human you end up failing right and
feeling ashamed of yourself feeling
feeling like you failed so the person
has to know themselves enough so that
they know what works for them and what
doesn't you need sleep but maybe the
thing that I need you don't right so we
got to know ourselves and what works for
us and what doesn't work for ourselves
then we have to understand what are
reasonable limits right and do they
change right I mean I see people who say
after having a pneumonia real example it
takes people a while to recover but
they're furious with themselves that
they can't do you know two weeks after
the pneumonia what they were able to do
before and and the rest is like wo like
you know you to be kind to yourself you
have to nurture yourself like you can do
all that again but just not now like
you're not supposed to be super human
like after humans like break a leg or
get pneumonia they it takes recovery
time right but that's when we're getting
at often what is the trauma that tells
that person that they have to be more
than human right and you know sometimes
people want so much of me and I'm so
empathic and I've labored under I need
to do more for so long maybe it's that
maybe that person was very vulnerable
when they were younger and they learned
the only way I'm going to take care of
myself is to be superhuman maybe they
learned that they weren't good enough
unless everything was an A+ right I mean
we don't know where it comes from but if
that's the lesson there's something
traumatic at the root of
it yeah for sure
so as one sort of last take on that how
do you
balance Grace for yourself love for
yourself acceptance of your limitations
a willingness to be human with wanting
to push yourself
and really taking advantage of what I
think is the greatest gift of The Human
Experience which is you can get better
right
well it has to start from a premise that
say look I can I could make my life
better you know I think I can make my
life good and now let me try and
understand myself because what you just
described is hard to do right so if a
person doesn't have the ability to say
go out get Psychotherapy right then
reflect meditate talk to people around
you about life you know plenty people
talk a lot but they're not talking about
each other right you know you talk about
hey what's up with you we haven't talked
in a while about like what's going on in
Life or you've looked a little different
you know one way or another like people
talk really about life reflect about
life write about life think about
yourself be curious about yourself right
I'm never not going to therapy I don't
care what happens if you say nothing
could ever go wrong again I know that's
not going to be true but I'll go to
therapy because it's hard to understand
ourselves and it's hard to keep the
plate spinning of life even when we are
trying to be conscious of taking care of
ourselves so so if one has whatever
abilities or resources we have to
understand ourselves and to be curious
about ourselves and others and people we
love around us take advantage of it
because what you just described like
that's when people are living healthily
right that's when people can roll with
the punches pretty well when things go
negative you know in a negative way and
and they can feel good about the things
that go positive and they can make
rational attributions like hey that
thing went well and it's not just luck
like people will say everything bad is
my fault everything good is luck right I
mean how many times do we hear that of
take responsibility if something didn't
go well and you're a part of that like
look at that right the goal isn't to let
people out of their responsibility right
you know if you're driving along
carefully and somebody broadsides you
like I I can't map that to your
responsibility but if you know you
weren't really paying that attention the
way that you would really like to have
been like just take ownership of that
right it doesn't mean it's your fault
but it's like I want to look at
everything and I want to understand how
I can bring myself to Bear to make my
life better and I want to do that when
when they're negative things and I want
to do that when there are positive
things I don't want to Discount the
positive as luck or nobody loves me or
nobody cares about me nobody likes me oh
I was out from work for 3 weeks and you
know 14 people sent flowers you know or
like really care to call you know don't
don't make yourself special in a
negative way right it's something I
often you know find myself saying wow
that's interesting so that so it's about
understanding cuz what you described is
hard but it is not impossible and it's
not impossible even when there's a
strong current for a person to swim
against and that current isn't
necessarily isn't determined by
socioeconomic status right or you know
or by some other demographic or where
where people will think like I'm not
going to be able to do that right it it
can be as hard whether people have
resources or don't or like you know
there's there's no Arbiter of how hard
that is right other than if people are
really struggling obviously put roof
over their head and food like we need to
help as a society people more but to not
be deterred because I've never had
therapy before or you know I can write
an introspect but I I don't have
insurance to go get someone to help me
or I can buy one book but not five it's
like just start doing something because
that factor of does it register in you I
can understand myself better I can make
my life better right maybe I'm not
responsible for the bad things that are
running over and over in my head that
factor is where worth more than all the
seemingly logistical things that money
and resources can provide so don't be
deterred if you don't feel that you have
what it takes even if you don't have
anyone to talk to you have you can have
a pen and paper right like there are
things we can do to help ourselves and
don't be deterred because that resolve
that awareness maybe life can be better
often matters more than any other
Factor yeah I I love that a lot I think
that that's an area that people um fail
to understand and I I think this is the
biggest trap about trauma is it leads
you to believe that you're not going to
be able to improve things and so uh I
always push back against too much
self-acceptance it's like I do want
people to love themselves but I want
them to earn that love and the reason is
in fact it's not that I want people to
it's that there is an algorithm running
in your mind given to you by Evolution
that demands that you earn your own
Respect by doing things that you believe
are valuable now the things you believe
are valuable are going to be born of
both
Evolution uh again with those algorithms
and things you've chosen to believe but
you can't stand in front of the mirror
and just say I love you I love you I
love you unless you can tie that two
reasons I love you because and
unfortunately I think our I think
everybody's love is conditional even
your mother's and certainly your own
love of yourself is highly conditional
and the sooner that people Embrace that
and realize one of the great joys of
life is is getting better growing
pushing yourself and improving uh you
just have to be very careful about what
you build your self-esteem around in
fact speaking of that do you talk to
people about what they build their
self-esteem around this feels like a
really important thing what do you
encourage them to build their
self-esteem on relevant to that question
and everything that you just said about
wanting to look in the mirror and be
able to love yourself and respect
yourself and feel good about yourself is
we always want to know what we don't
know right if we don't know what we
don't know we will fall victim to it so
understanding that we can't know
everything about ourselves that the
process of understanding ourselves isn't
just taking stock of what I know now but
it's curiosity about ourselves it's the
kind of things that come out to us
through meditation or reflection or
conversation it is so important to know
that we can't just look in the mirror
and know everything about ourselves like
a great majority of what goes on inside
of ourselves is hidden from us it
doesn't mean that our conceptions of
self can't be both good and conscious
but we need to be
respectful of of the things that we
don't understand and even that there are
things that we don't understand because
it is it is very often that from which
we start building the the strong sense
of self right because we we have to
start off from a place that is real
right it's why I think I had said to you
when we were talking before that like my
math minor as I I often say is I think
you know the most helpful uh academic or
intellectual thing I've ever done done
right it taught me to look at things in
a logical linear manner right because
logic is important like there times it
doesn't get trumped by emotion we're
using it for understanding right so we
want to be able to bring logic to Bear
to try and understand ourselves but part
of that process tells us that we want to
bring logic to bear in understanding our
own lives that we can construct
narratives that we can go look at
ourselves and say okay wait what
happened when like we can use logic to
accept that that thing we were kind of
pushing under the surface maybe actually
was really traumatic and and I can think
about the changes in me before and after
so we use logic to construct a story of
self right and the story of self is very
interested in us right it's interested
in ourselves and it's interested in the
things that have gone on or are going on
underneath the surface because that
tells us about the things that that are
more powerful than logic I might be able
to logically describe to you all sorts
of things about myself at a certain
stage of life and all sorts of different
things at another stage in life right
and maybe those things became negative
in the in the context of trauma but I
need to understand that oh something
happened that
shifted what is true inside of me right
in a mathematical way if you can't
understand it go back to the giv right
so if it's a given inside of me that
I've been the same all along and nothing
is really changed in me in some way that
I don't understand I'm totally not going
to understand how I have changed in my
conception of self right if if I can
perceive that hey trauma can change
people and I can see that I'm Different
outside of the trauma then we go back to
the Givens of the problem and we see
that something has happened and the
whole lay of the land is different right
that's why I wrote In the book that I
wrote about a map that is changed that
maybe you had a map helping you
understand yourself and what you're
capable of what you're good at and what
you enjoy and what you know you might
steer away from because you don't enjoy
it as much you aren't as good like you
understood all of this and you
understood that you were a good person
and a perseverant person if you cease to
understand that the whole map of self
has changed so we may need to go back to
that and that's what I'll often end up
saying because because people sometimes
will want to start off from the giv the
premise that nothing's ever going to be
okay maybe I could eat something out but
I'm cursed and we have to go say well we
have to go back to the giv of this
problem right of of like did your map
change because of trauma and and we can
use a mathematical analogy or we can use
uh the analogy of a map but what we're
trying to get at is constructing a story
of self that honors logic and uses logic
to investigate but most importantly
honors the impact of the lyic of the
emotional right and if we're going to
honor the impact of the lyic and the
emotional we will not be able to do that
without honoring the impact of trauma in
very very very many people yeah that uh
that is a complex bag of things speaking
of complex bags my favorite story in the
book is Uncle
Rango uh which man it's weird to say
that that's uh a favorite but I was
actually really inspired by that story
um if you don't mind who is Uncle Rango
and how did he make it into the book
well I so appreciate that you said that
it's my favorite story of my life right
in terms of um learning from it right I
may have stories at the birth of my
children that are emotional but when I
think of life lessons it's the best
story because very little was expected
of him he was expelled from school in
the sixth grade no one paid much
attention to him he was angry he fought
a lot right there were a lot of things
about him
that from the
outside would have looked very
unimpressive like someone who didn't
have much inside of him and I I don't
know how he felt about himself back then
he didn't have a lot of words to put
around those things right but what I do
know is he lived a great
life and he was a good person in the
community around him he was good to his
family he was solid at the things that
he did and when he talked about
himself there was such a dramatic change
after he went off to service in the
second world war because what was in
side of him came to the four and he was
promoted in the field uh several times
over to become a master sergeant and was
decorated twice for bravery in battle
and the one that he was proud of that he
talked about to me and I think to my
mother and certainly to his wife but it
may have been to no one else uh was that
he jumped out of a foxhole under heavy
fire to rescue someone who had been shot
and was sort of left there to suffer
because maybe people would try and
rescue that person and get killed
themselves and without anyone else he
jumped out he he put the person you know
bolts flying and he made it back right
and I think what he understood from his
experiences was that he could lead
people when when push came to shove uh
he could call upon in
himself uh qualities perseverance
resilience that as far as I could
understand no one thought were him and
he didn't think was in him either at one
point in time when he was leading a
group of Men Behind Enemy Lines they
radioed in and thank them for their
service right many the the expectation
was that they were all going to die and
he led all of them to
safety now that was the first time he
was decorated and I think this honors
the complexity of trauma because I think
what my uncle experienced in the in the
second world war made him a person who
had a good life right I should say he
made himself a person who had a good
life but that e experience was gerine to
it but the second world war was an awful
thing and it was an awful thing for him
too and the reason he never told people
about the decorations we knew he was
decorated it was it been in the papers
but he wouldn't talk about it including
the one where there's no shame right you
jumped out of a fox hole with bullets
flying you put someone over your
shoulder and you carry them back and
saved their life right what is there to
be ashamed
about nothing about that but he was
ashamed of himself because in order to
lead those men from Behind Enemy Lines
someone had to kill the prisoners they
had and his thought was put into a
position of leadership where now he was
leading was you can't ask somebody to do
that you can't order someone to do that
I don't know how the command structure
work if that has to be done it's your
responsibility if you're in charge to do
it and it tortured him the rest of his
life so so much good came and what he
learned learned about himself but the
suffering came along with it and I think
it honors the complexity of human beings
and of trauma and ultimately I think it
is a story of Triumph that he did
survive and people sent him letters many
many years on there were people who sent
him a letter was another grandchild and
they'd send him a letter like here's
another person who was born because of
what you did for us I mean I saw some of
those letters right but he carried
within him the shame that he understood
that he was capable of killing someone
who wasn't armed regardless of what the
situation was and he understood that he
did the right thing I mean he was very
Concrete in that way it was the right
thing to do but doesn't mean it's not
supposed to torment you yeah for people
that don't know the details of the story
which you cover in the book they had to
cross back over uh from Enemy Lines at
night silently and they had three
prisoners of War uh who obviously would
have been incentivized to make noise uh
and so he killed them that that is uh
man to your point Point that's just
that's brutal
and goes back to that need to
contextualize what it means and I have
to imagine in terms of assigning meaning
that it would be incredibly meaningful
to see the people that came into the
world that otherwise would not have had
he not brought them back did he ever
talk about that very little what was
clear to me I never asked him this
because I didn't ask him things you know
times he said things and as he got older
he said a little bit more but I was very
careful as was my mother about what we
asked him but it was very clear that he
would never have done that to save his
own life that he could not have done
that it would have been shameful to do
so to save as he said there were three
boys just like me that's what he said
there were three boys and I was one boy
they spoke a different language and
I matter four boys right but he was
responsible for all those other men and
that's why it meant so much to him
because that was the meaning meaning of
it all and all those letters were saved
and my my aunt his wife died after him
and the letters were burned and their
ashes were buried with her that's how
important it all was to him and to
her it was my understanding that she um
she was the one that called for them to
be destroyed because she said they're
his and nobody else's or something what
I don't know why that hit me but it hit
me
what what was her logic why why not um
you know you look at somebody like
Churchill I'm reading a graphy of
Churchill right now which by the way is
astounding his life is absolutely
incredible um but he wanted the world to
read the letters people used to say
sometimes you felt like you got a letter
from him because he was like
pre-printing it um why destroy them I
would kill to read those yeah I believe
it's because they were so personal right
that there was a personal justification
for what he did that was embodied in
those letters in the next child or as
life went on grandchild great grandchild
that that I believe reminded him of the
meaning of it like that that's what I
thought about it at the time and and
I've thought that ever since and and and
he and Myan had agreed to that that they
were so personal that if he died Whoever
has died last would be buried with the
ashes of the letters and whenever she
died she would be buried with his dog
tags and that's what they did man their
relationship sounds uh very interesting
and I would going back to connecting to
another human is the thing that's going
to get you past trauma I'd love to hear
more about their relationship anything
that you know
about like was that a gravitational
Center for them you know going to war my
uncle was in Vietnam and my aunt uh has
been pretty clear when he came back it
it that was sort of the beginning of the
end um and
just he was never able to contextualize
the trauma and um it did not lead to
Ideal relationship Behavior so what was
it that allowed Uncle Rango and his wife
to connect like was it a knowing thing
were they good at this because it sounds
like before he went to war he's fighting
a lot he's getting in trouble nobody
expects much it's kind of surprising
that he ends up having this um Love
Affair for his entire life to the point
where she's being buried with his dog
tags and I mean it's just like it's
pretty intense yeah so to the best of my
understanding you my uncle Rango had a
lot of Charisma right there was a lot
about him that Drew people as well he
was a good leader right and my aunt Rose
was quite a catch right I see that from
the pictures and how everyone talked
about her and they had a romance before
he went off to war and they had
something that people unfortunately
often did not have in the Vietnam era
which is like the knowledge that people
at home you know were p for them and
thought they were doing understood they
were doing this right that they were
doing something important and and he was
was conscious of that that he was going
off to fight for they were very proud
they were Italian immigrants they were
very proud to be American and he was
going off to fight for America and her
man was going off to fight for America
they were very traditional in their
roles and you know part of his
motivation was you talked about is he
wanted to come home to her and she
wanted him to come home to her and that
was with them I think letters I never
knew that they write letters to one
another I never learned that I they must
have right I just didn't know them and
then when he came back he was received
in that way he was a hero in the
community I mean the the the you know
the communities were very ethnically and
in many ways still are ethnically
divided uh the Italian-American
community and a lot of the people in
certain generations of immigrants and he
was a hero in that Community you know he
had gone off and fought for America and
he'd honored himself so he he had that
and she was very respectful in that way
that like she just loved and admired and
was in awe of him for what he had gone
and done and he loved and admired her
for you know the steadfastness of the
person that she was and I don't know my
uncle I go ever wash the dish and my
aunt Rose didn't go out and lay tile but
you know they had very traditional roles
um those roles were so mutually
supportive and and it's not just
specific to that era but it it works so
well for them uh and I think under you
the roles then couched the real
closeness and
intimacy that existed between them and I
think he was able to share with her in a
way that he wasn't with anyone else
because he was very you know ashamed to
talk about feelings right and I think he
could talk about them with my aunt Rose
I believe that to be
true it's really interesting you
mentioned um The Narrative and the
breakdown of shared narratives really
worries me in a modern context I there's
no other time I would rather be alive I
am not pessimistic about the world World
in general but I also want to face head
on the things that are difficult and I
think that one of the things that's very
difficult is the velocity of information
made available by social media the sort
of algorithmically induced psychosis of
only seeing one thing over and over and
over and over and over and over and over
whether that's um the things you already
believe or the things that make you IR
rate because that's what social media
does to make sure that the engagement is
up uh has really uh upset people break
down to Shared narratives so if what
we've been talking about today is on the
money and how you contextualize your
trauma Your Role the meaning that you
assign things how much do you deal in
your clinical practice with people that
they they're just not able to put
together a cohesive narrative about who
they are what they bring to the world
and do you think about that breakdown at
a a societal level as well like does
that make your radar as something to be
concerned about yeah you often it is
hard to help a person establish a
narrative I mean think once we get
rolling it goes pretty well but
sometimes getting it moving is hard
because there is that resistance right
and that is often because the person
doesn't see the social context right so
so think about someone who internalizes
that they are less than because of a
Prejudice that they grew up with and
they grew up with it so intensely and it
was like the only thing present in a
sense the Sou were swimming in so to
speak right was was that and then the
shame of it tells them where logically
they can say I mean how many times does
this happen I could never count where
they could say someone else I would
never tell anyone they're less than
because of and they'll say the thing
they were bullied or where the lens
through which the Prejudice came right
but they feel that they are different
right but but me I am ashamed I am less
than right because that's the lesson of
trauma people will say that all the time
they they would not denigrate or tell
someone oh you're hopeless or this or
that because of the exact same thing
that has happened to them right but we
reflexively make ourselves special for
negative reasons and then we lose sight
of that we lose sight of truth right so
we have to come at that right so so one
way of coming at that is it used to be
done and sometimes is like an empty
chair way well please tell that person
who's been through exactly what you have
I mean what's the the the tactic is not
that subtle right like we're trying to
get the person talking essentially to
themselves right and tell them that what
they did is wrong and they should feel
ashamed and it was their fault right and
the person can't do it right because
they're thinking outwardly and they
wouldn't say it to someone else do we
have our route in you know or what do
they say so that may be a route in in
another setting with a different person
it may be to talk about the social
context gosh that's shameful in some
places and not in others you know
shameful in places that have a societal
sickness and not in places that don't
right so so we can we can guide towards
exposing the unconscious which which
really often what does it mean often
exposing the lessons of trauma that are
in Us in these ways we're not aware of
the less than lessons the shame lessons
the oh I'm limited lessons I'm curse
lessons for you but not for me lessons
so there are a lot of ways of getting it
that and sometimes there's resistance
and sometimes there isn't you know again
it's it's hard to tell and you don't
really tell by intelligence you tell by
can the person make a connection are
they curious about themselves and if not
then if I'm the therapist it's my job to
work hard for that of I want to make a
connection right I want to work hard on
I want to figure out the route of
approach because we all have narratives
right we all have narratives and if
there's no real trauma impacting The
Narrative great The Narrative is still
relevant right maybe that person who has
recurrent depression that doesn't have
anything to do with trauma does have to
do with other purely physical conditions
in their life or medical conditions
right like it's always important to know
the
narrative and the narrative most often
leads us to the impact of
trauma
The Narrative leads to the impact of
trauma meaning help me understand that
what do you mean by that okay I'll give
an example I often give is so this is a
true story so a young woman who had won
an award in high school okay and she
didn't grow up in privileged
circumstances or where a lot was
expected of her but she was very smart
very empathic like you list all the
qualities to like go out there and
conquer the world like she had them all
but not a lot was expected of her and it
wasn't an environment where people were
going to challenge celebrate anything
right like that but there were
opportunities here and there and she'd
won an award right back in high school
and it was a big award to win and it was
the anchor in her to look I can do more
right like there's something in me right
like I can go do this or I can go do
that I can leave this place that hasn't
done well by me and I I can make a life
for myself like she believed that why
because it was true right and it was
anchored to something as often we anchor
things that are important to something
tangible like I won that award this is
what that tells me okay on the other
side of a very bad
trauma she had an understanding of
exactly what that award meant that was
the understanding she'd always had of it
to ask her in the in the present right
and it was that the award was a mockery
of her that it that it showed that that
was the best thing that would ever
happen to her that like that was going
to be her crowning you know she was all
sorts of sarcastic and cynical things
about herself and what it meant was that
she couldn't go anywhere the exact
opposite with no awareness whatsoever
that that had changed in her she's not
an outlier what I hear you saying then
is nothing is either good or bad but
thinking makes it so so because you said
the narrative leads to the trauma so if
she which I love this speaks my language
in terms of how I would hold myself
accountable if something happened to me
so getting back to our initial question
uh if if I encountered a major trauma
and look I I have had my share of
traumas but I've
always I I haven't one that I would sort
of put as category one uh death um being
attacked or something like that
thankfully but if I did the thing that I
would be trying to figure out is how do
I tell a story about that that empowers
me and allows me to move forward and so
what I hear you saying is that if the
narrative is the thing that leads to the
trauma this look the thing is obviously
bad your brother dying is obviously bad
so I not asking anybody to believe that
the trauma itself is good but going back
to Victor Frankle going back to Nelson
Mandela it's like being locked up for as
long as Nelson Mandela was being in a
concentration camp full stop just
horrendous horrendous but both of them
found a way to find meaning so that they
could get through it and not only get
through it once out like really rived
and and echoed through the world in
pretty amazing ways so if what you're
saying is true The Narrative can lead to
the trauma then the narrative should
also be able to lead away from the
trauma into making sense of something in
a way that allows you to move forward in
a positive way yes is I think the way I
might summarize that and I I'll explain
is to say nothing that is not bad is
automatically either good or bad right
like there are bad things like being
imprisoned unjustifiably that's a bad
thing right a death that's
unexpected and happen suddenly is is a
bad thing doing things to hurt people is
a bad thing it's a bad thing we can do I
have done that and it has been bad right
that kind of statement if I recognize in
myself that I've done bad things that's
that's sometimes the bad thing to
recognize right but after parsing that
apart like directly harming people right
is bad whether it's physical it's
emotional like I I I'm very comfortable
making a direct statement about that
hurting people is bad right and there
are ways we can do that and there are
ways we can't do that if I have some
slight value difference from you and I
think oh that's bad because you're
hurting my family values or whatever
that's not true right like they're
things that are that are subject to
opinion and there are things that are
just very clearly bad and directly
hurting someone is bad and if you've
done that then we can take stock of it
we can atone we can take why did we do
that can we seize upon the good in
ourselves make things better like the
man in the other story who had done very
very very very many bad things and was
automatically doing bad things in in a
reflexive way who found it in himself to
recognize all of that and thereby do
something good right so we we pars out
there is good and bad right but after we
get over that is what is our perception
of it and Trauma I'm simplifying a
little bit but trauma drives towards the
bad right that means this thing is bad
and you are bad it's not this thing is
bad and maybe you are not bad right but
we have to understand that so that we
can understand what it means this bad
thing has happened but I am not bad I
lost my brother to Suicide that doesn't
mean that I'm cursed doesn't mean that
I'm a loser and I'm never going to make
anything of myself doesn't make any
sense right something bad happened but
I'm not bad not perfect either and I
want to look at ways to make myself
better but I'm separating the truth from
The Reflex which is something bad has
happened and I am bad when I was around
him and and I didn't know I didn't see I
mean you know that's the path we go down
of
I can you know I
could I could count or could not could
not count how many times a person
including at times me earlier in life
would explain why I am bad and way it
seems logically very very sound except
is untrue because all that logical
soundness is is couch in the emotion
that tells me I must be bad so now I'm
going to back map to the logic just like
the person who doesn't make memories
going forward says I don't want to shake
your hand right I don't know why and
then makes up a story right but the
importance of the story is is the
Badness right in that case it's the
Badness because last time I shook your
hand it was a pen like I it hurts so
that's bad right but it's much much much
more important right when the the story
is us I am bad and I'm going to tell you
why and there's no one who who who
believes who knows so to speak that they
are bad who doesn't tell you a story of
why we all do right so we need to
understand that the the premise isn't
right and if the premise is right that
there's bad in us and we've done bad
things I work with many people who've
done things we look at that is bad let's
call that for what it is and let's look
at it in a way because as you commented
earlier on in our discussion we are
responsible for ourselves going forward
who else is going to take responsibility
for us I think that also means that
we're responsible for helping each other
more than we do right that if one of us
has no one and is alone that that we
contribute some resources to helping
them have a cat or you know the societal
interventions that link people to people
who need people linked to them like the
gregarious person to the nursing home or
t you're down on on your luck Let's help
you so you can get back on your feet
like we don't help people a lot in
society we owe more to one another
because of our human interconnectedness
but that doesn't mean anyone's taking
responsibility for us and we we can't
and should not count on that we take
responsibility for ourselves and lo and
behold that's also how we Marshall the
best supports around us if I take
responsibility for myself I say okay now
let me look at who or what can help me
if I don't take responsibility for
myself and I feel like nothing can ever
get better or I think some awful things
and I got my head down literally and
metaphorically and I'm not going to see
the help that's around me you might be
standing next to me holding out a
helping hand I won't even see it those
are individual narratives what do you
think about the shared narratives so
there's a couple things that I worry
about one you've got social media allows
you to algorithm your way to um a narrow
band of humanity and you never see
anything outside of that so you get a
breakdown or an atomization Isa the
right way to think about algorithms you
get an atomization of the algorithm so
you're having an experience that is
relevant to you and all the things that
you've cobbled together but you don't
necessarily have a broader spectrum of
like a a wider sense of unity so you
talked about um uncle Rango was Italian
but he was a proud American and that
sense of the bigger Narrative of proud
American that that is breaking down and
so we get into
um smaller tribes because you're
eventually going to be in a tribe but
the bigger the tribe I think the better
off you are the more atomized the tribe
the more problematic so that's part
number one that we're getting into these
very atomized tribes part number two is
the kinds of things that used to give us
really broad tribes was religion and
once re religion and by the way I'm not
religious um but once religion stopped
being a truth and started being a story
I think that's like that just furthers
this atomization of uh the tribal units
and when I think about okay the the
thesis that we've laid out today is you
really need to connect like that that's
a big punchline and the fact that a
person can think themselves dead because
they have stopped connecting with other
people just really really crazy um so
when you look at what's happening in a
modern context do you see that feeding
into um trauma depression an inability
to create a positive State and if so how
can people inoculate themselves against
that yeah okay I just want to scream yes
yes yes um we are in a place societally
where I believe we step further and
further away from our responsibility as
Citizens my uncle saw it as his
responsibility as as an American citizen
to go to War for America right we often
don't see it as my responsibility as an
American citizen to think about what's
coming my way and then we falsely
polarize if group a and Group B are
opposed and I'm in group a and you're in
group b right isn't it so much easier if
some data comes my way allegedly right
some assertion that says how bad Group B
people are be like yeah I don't like
them anyway right you're bad and I'm not
and then data information alleged data
comes to you a group a people are bad
right you're bad I mean we're distancing
ourselves because we're not fulfilling
our responsibility to stop and think
confirmatory evidence is is emotionally
gratifying right if I think be people
are bad and like a b person did
something bad I I see it in the news and
somebody pushed it to me right you're
all bad right like how many times are we
doing that how many thousands and
thousands of times are we doing that and
then the political mechanisms is is not
my play I think to be political but to
say psychologically right political
mechanisms harness that right now you
have a bunch of people who are not
assessing data one way or another who
give in to the seduction of the
confirmatory evidence it feels good to
see that right instead of saying well
wait may wait a second a b person did
that did an a person do the same thing
like maybe none of this matters right or
is that really hurtful to me or is it
just easy to say yeah and that feels
good to me look the same way we have a
responsibility of sometimes reaching for
the apple and not the potato chips right
it's a lot easier to reach for the
potato chips but if you keep doing that
and you're not taking responsibility for
yourself right you become very unhealthy
right so we say and we should say more
you have a responsibility for yourself
right we don't talk about the
responsibility as Citizens to have some
understanding of what we're what is true
and what we're saying and why right it
doesn't mean we shouldn't have opinions
that differ but let's separate truth
from opinions right I don't think it's
politics to say that when you have say
pictures side by side of like this is
crowd size a and this is crowd size B
and crowd size a is bigger than crowd
size B and we could survey first graders
across the world and they'll agree with
that but yet we have an entire set of
assertions and then further assertions
and alleged facts based upon the
patently untrue idea that the smaller
crowd was bigger like we're not going to
be okay right we need to reject that
because we start treading into truth
doesn't matter because it serves me to
think that truth doesn't matter or
because it serves me to harness people
who are susceptible so we getting to
what is true is very problematic and I
definitely I share your concerns there
but before we move on to truth how do we
generate a shared narrative what what is
the right um level of analysis for
building out the narrative is it country
is it neighborhood is it right left is
it Global like how do we in a world
where atomization is the gravitational
pull what do we use in a world where it
doesn't seem like religion fits the bill
anymore although maybe that's your
answer and I'm certainly open um but
what is the thing what is the narrative
how do we use that to bring us
together well it's got to start it's got
to start close to home right the idea
of take
responsibility for a lot of things enact
and live that responsibility towards
some of those things and don't feel
responsible for everything right so the
idea of take responsibility for a lot of
things right so I take responsibility
for what's directly around me right I
take responsibility if I walk outside
the door here and someone has tripped
and Fallen I'm going to stick a hand out
to help them up right if if you look
really sad and I'm a little worried I'm
going to say something right I'm going
to take responsibility for the for the
people in the situations around me if
I'm intimidating someone and getting my
way met or I know someone wants to say
something to me and I turn my back
through one way or another it's then
it's my responsibility to stop doing
that to look around me and to take
responsibility and then and then take
that on higher levels too right the the
immediate the street I live on is is
much more of my responsibility right
than than the community I live but the
community I live in is is my
responsibility too right as is the world
right I can't solve global warming but I
could think a little bit more about my
buying you know bottles that get
recycled to put in a landfill or did I
think to take something with me I can
put water in like so there's less
responsibility because we can control
less right but then some people can do
very much on the world stage right but
it has to start in a paramal way with
responsibility for what's closest so the
first responsibility is between me and
me I selling myself short by telling
myself Lies by selling myself short
because it's easier to eat the potato
chip than the apple and I really don't
feel well and you know I can't exercise
anymore and I see my energy going down
and like that's awful and where's that
heading right so I got to be responsible
to myself and then if you're the person
sitting next to me I have to feel some
responsibility for you too especially if
we're under the same roof we're in the
same family we're in the same Community
right so take responsibility for those
things and that's what that's what leads
us to cast with the wide net right then
really enact and live responsibility for
the roles that are closer to home so
like an obvious example is parent right
if parent is part of your responsibility
then live that right live that right if
you're not doing as good a job as a
parent because you're depressed and you
haven't taking care of your depression
or because you're drinking three or four
nights a week to sooth attention and
that impacts your kids or even because
you think that the success that you're
making in some way is doing things they
need when they really need your time and
attention like there's a million
different ways that can be right but
step back and really take a look at that
role right because that's a role you
want to really live right and then don't
feel responsible for everything right
when people are empathically attuned
conscientious right it's very easy for
people to then feel responsible for
everything they're responsible for
everything that's going wrong in the
family they're responsible even when
someone else's lack of Health may be
driving all of those things right they
feel responsible in ways that don't let
them go out and strive more because
they're taking on unreasonable burdens
right so so take responsibility for a
lot of things and act and live
responsibility for some subset of those
things and don't feel responsible for
everything it's like if we bring that
then we honor the nuances and you know
if we talk about some political issue or
whatever it may be and I see that oh if
you and I think in a diametrically
opposed way right if we're doing that
then instead of some reflex that now
puts you in a bad category and then
wants nothing but confirmatory
information right like oh like let me
well like let me at least learn how you
think maybe I'll learn something from
you right and and maybe if neither one
of us convinces the other one little bit
we have an experience that someone in
the other Camp can be reasonable right I
can be reasonable right we have a shared
Human Experience even if we differ and
it's that that we wish to engender and
in many ways the the hyper confirmatory
social media right and you yes it can be
difficult to tell truth from lies but
you know sometimes 1 plus 1 is two and
not three right so if we're living in
those
responsibilities and we're grounding
ourselves then we don't choose the thing
that's easy you know we don't sometimes
I want to choose a potato chip right but
if I choose it all the time that's bad
right so maybe sometimes a person
chooses the information that that that
um confirms what they want to hear right
but like most of the time don't do that
if you can don't do it all the time
right and if you do that you bear
responsibility for that when you have a
set of opinions that don't acknowledge
that other people could possibly have
different opinions right or that there's
something other than demons because they
have different opinions then you know
you're in a place that has to come in
some way through the lens of trauma
right because who becomes that adamant
right I must be right and if you don't
believe in me you know you're demonic I
mean there's like they're that's a
problem right so it comes through the
lens of trauma and it begets trauma
people who don't have all that trauma in
them can say Okay I I don't agree with
your opinion I don't like your opinion
and I'll actually fight against your
opinion but like that doesn't mean I
don't want to give you helping hand if
you've fallen down right I mean that
makes sense right but we have to step
out of ourselves enough and into truth
and rationality and shared humanness in
order to be able to do that it's a
responsibility no
doubt speaking of humanness
responsibility what do you think about
AI is that do you see a path to that
being beneficial or do you see that as
um a race down a path of further
isolation yeah I I have no special
knowledge right I I think like many
people I feel a sense of hope but I also
feel very afraid right and I think
that's appropriate and and specifically
so why in me is because I talk about AI
affirment with people and sometimes
people will solicit opinions and and I
get to have really interesting
conversations about it and I think what
happens a lot and I know it's not all
the time but but people come at AI often
through the lens of we're going to use
some form of logic one way or another to
get to a place right but humanness human
thought and human decisions are not just
based in logic and in fact they're
trumped by other things and I think if
we're going to
create intelligence we have to honor
like what actually goes on inside of us
right and then we have to be very
careful because if we're honoring that
and what we're trying to create it also
has great capacity for uh der relution
of Duty to others and perpetration of
evil towards others so it makes me
afraid when I think are we coming at it
through some um overdetermined and
overused set of logical processes that
ignore the the more important side of
the equation right the emotional or the
affect if that worries me then I think
okay what if that is honored that
worries me too right um but I do feel
that sense of hope I I just think we
have to be very very very careful
because to some extent we're playing
with fire when we're playing with human
will right so if we're going to make
will outside of us or intelligence
outside was let's be extra careful I
mean I'm simplifying in in some ways but
I just I think it warrants caution and I
think it's another incentive to really
try and understand ourselves and where
does the perpetration of evil come from
right you know someone who decides I
just I'm going to feel better if things
are worse for you that's a great
question where does the perpetration of
evil come from is that do you think
people are born with that do you think
that it's shaped over time well I think
there there are
biological predisposition certain ways
there can be certain characteristics or
traits through uh uh genetics and the
manifestation of genetics but what I
believe is far more interesting in the
Lion Share of the responsibility is the
trauma that happens to people right like
very few people you know want to really
really hurt other people when there
hasn't been something really wrong in
their own life right which is why the
education that I'm that I would strongly
advocate for in say Elementary School is
not just about Let's Help the person for
example who's bullied understand the
bully but let's help the bully
understand why that person is bullying
the other person there's a lot of people
who are bullies at 10 years old are
bullies at 50 years old right and are
they leading companies or governments or
families even a lot of people are
leading families right or they're
they're part of a family right how much
is their trauma at the Forefront and not
always sometimes it drives people to the
opposite places of of being caretaking
and and things that are very very
positive but it can drive people to
reenact the trauma to wish to have power
by reenacting and and being the powerful
person in ways they were on the other
side I that's why people talk about you
know they'll say repetition compulsion
it's not that right and not everybody
who's traumatized traumatizes other
people absolutely not but it's a very
it's a known thing that is that happens
with a high degree of frequency right
and it comes from the terror of being
traumatized and then the identification
with the aggressor because that means
safety right so so I'm just giving one
example right of where why ises
identifying with the aggressor mean
safety because identifying as the
aggressor yeah and there's not a set of
logical thought process because often
people who are doing that don't actually
think that but they're being the
aggressor and they they can't V most of
the time put words to that right so so
the so identifying with aggression or
enacting anger I'm really really mad at
a world that's rejected me I mean if you
if you look at commonality just for
example Le in biographies of Adolf
Hitler and Joseph Stalin you absolutely
see estrangement from a world and then
an immense amount of anger towards that
world and destructive impulses right and
you think trauma does so much damage
including in the subset of people who
have early trauma that leads to evil and
they're responsible for the evil this
isn't know somehow we're letting people
off the hook who are perpetrating evil
but but does trauma in certain people in
certain situations you know take all
comers there's going to be a significant
number of people in whom trauma
especially early childhood trauma
greases the wheels of progress of doing
evil so it is so so important that we
understand trauma understand what it
does to us start this understanding when
we're young right so so we understand as
as a parents who are raising children
right in education paradigms of
understanding trauma and and being able
to fight against it in ways that I
believe
I I truly do believe can absolutely
change the world I think the majority of
awfulness of suffering that's wrought in
the world is wrought through the lens of
responses to trauma or people who don't
resist those responses right because the
trauma in them might be leading them to
lead say with less self assertion or
less coming up against something uh and
asserting themselves and they might
right so when you see the when you think
about the impact of trauma and sometimes
it gets studied through couples or
through family systems and and you can
often tell like oh here's this
constellation within this system and oh
this person's trauma has really you know
really kind of push forward Landing them
here and this person is push forward
Landing them there and this seed of
trauma fell in that sort of fertile
ground for this problem or that problem
and it's not always that but boy there
is a lot of that interwoven into human
suffering whether it's the human
suffering from one you know enacted from
one person to another in a household
setting or it's someone who is you know
starting a war and murdering thousands
of people wholesale right for you
through that lens of trauma so in a
small lens or a big lens it's all
awfulness it's all suffering that gets
pushed forward by trauma and by our
responses to it and furthermore by the
fact that that the the responses in us
are are often hidden from us and from
there from our ability to understand and
change them the woman who saw
the award as a mark of Shame and a
mockery did not know that she gained
from it so much inspiration and strong
sense of self and it led her to do good
things that moved her life forward
didn't even know it anymore so there's
there's so much power to trauma that we
see in these examples they're real
examples and then we think this is going
on r large and we have the ability to
better understand it and to better treat
it and to prevent it yeah I mean the
20th century is replete with I don't
know Stalin but certainly um many of the
other experiments that went wrong from
Mao to Hitler um and seeing the Echoes
of trauma if that really is the thing
that underlined all of their behaviors
is it's pretty terrifying how far that
goes which coming back to AI there was a
book called upgrade by Blake Crouch
which wasn't about AI it was actually
about Gene editing but it could have
just as easily been about AI in terms of
the the premise of the book and spoiler
alert for anybody that's going to read
it um but the premise of the book is uh
that a woman becomes convinced that uh
humans just cannot make the right
decisions and that all of this trauma
whatever just emotions basically is how
she saw it emotions make us do really
dumb things shortsighted things things
that don't play the long game and so to
advance Humanity um she's going to
create a germline edit to the genes and
then propagate it across the whole world
through super spreaders and the upgrade
is all intellect and so she's basically
going to make everybody super
intelligent and by doing that people
would then be able to solve the greatest
problems from climate change whatever
and as it plays out in the book they
estimate that it'll kill a billion
people but that then everybody else will
be smart and they'll be able to solve
these problems and the punchline of the
book again spoiler alerts if you plan to
read it now would be the time to to mute
uh the podcast but um what the the the
hero of the book ends up realizing is oh
my whole life I've wanted to be more
intelligent that's a mistake because the
second because it's basically a brother
and sister the mother upgrades her two
kids and the second they become super
intelligent they each try to kill the
other because they don't believe that
approaching the problem the right way
and then the one who's like pushing all
this forward is willing to kill a
billion people and so the other guy goes
okay maybe this is still hubris uh but
I'm going to do a different upgrade and
I'm going to make everybody more
compassionate and so to your point about
okay what is the stem of evil if the
stem of evil is an emotional thing that
then is carrying out it's it it is
accelerated by intellect you know as far
as I can tell Hitler was was pretty
[__] bright and he was certainly
charismatic and when that's coupled with
evil like you have a very bad
combination so it's not like
intelligence automatically makes you
human friendly absolutely and so I think
that's what everybody's struggling with
with AI is that just because you're
smart doesn't mean that you're going to
be friendly to humans or friendly to
life uh in general and so then what does
become the way to align things and is
that going to be compassion or something
entirely different and look alignment is
many many many three-hour long
interviews by itself so trust me I know
that I'm just skimming across the
surface right now but it's very
interesting that as people look at the
AI problem that they're coming to that
conclusion of what what is the thing
like what do we have to do do we have to
make it love humans do we have to make
it love life is it you know something
completely different and then somebody
who's coming at it from the trauma angle
saying the same thing like if I want to
help unwind evil or pain and suffering
um I'm coming at this from a perspective
of Love connection it's a different
orienting mechanism which is very
interesting um myself as somebody who's
always lamented that I I definitely wish
that I was Far smarter than I
am that the overp pursuit of that may
actually not be optimizing The Human
Condition it feels like it would be uh
but in reality the and and this is
certainly I tell myself this because I
believe it and I certainly tell others
because uh my North Star is human
fulfillment and flourishing um the best
thing that life has to offer you is the
love of another human there's nothing
else so you know people look at my
success and I think they're drawn to the
um the wrong things in terms of if you
were to emulate my life the one thing I
would say oh that that is going to make
you happy for sure would be to emulate
my marriage not my pursuit of success
that I would actually
I won't I won't say it's it's not
inherently bad but it's a very dangerous
game not falling in love not cultivating
a relationship would be dangerous
cultivating a relationship making that
your number one priority that's going to
reward you like for sure if there's
anything that I'm confident in it's
getting good at that doing that poorly
is its own nightmare literally a
nightmare nightmare but doing it well is
better than doing money well or doing
anything else well that I have ever EXP
experienced yeah I want to start my
response to that with with the example
you gave which I think is is perfect of
the the story right that edits out right
anything but intelligence and starts
optimizing intelligence and that's a
thing right that's a thing that's going
to carry us forward we've edited out
what's not that right what's not logic
and intelligence I feel so sure that if
you run that experiment ahead if
everybody hasn't killed everybody else
at some point in time everybody who's
left will have cotard's
syndrome right which is nothingness
that's why we're so terrified by it
because the meaning isn't in the logic
the meaning isn't in logic good bad or
otherwise the meaning is in Emotion when
someone perpetrates evil they're angry
they're frustrated they feel terrible
about themselves terrible about others
it raises emotions in them when someone
sacrifices their life to save someone
else or to help someone else there's an
emotion in them there's empathic
Attunement they feel for the person they
feel for something greater than
themselves right it's it's it's the
affective or the emotional if you want
to put that word to it that drives all
the action drives all the action the
logic is just adorning it right the
logic is just the structure around it
you know the logic of the the pieces
that go into the car right the the
emotion is the person sitting in it
driving it around and things are
happening right the logic just is the
building block the the structure of it
and the specific pieces of of what goes
into to move something forward in in
time you got to put gas in the car you
got to maintain it like it's it's all
logical principles but nothing of it is
interesting what's interesting is like
the person in it what they're feeling in
it right what they're using it for I'm
trying to create an um I'm trying to
explain how like logic is part of the
picture but it's like the styrofoam
around the thing that matters right in a
sense and I'm not saying logic doesn't
matter we figure things out we figured
out penicillin for example like logic
matters but it doesn't make
meaning it's emotion that makes meaning
it's all that lyic affective stuff that
makes meaning and it's that where we
want to engender Health right where we
want to work against trauma we want to
prevent trauma because when people are
healthy they come to a place of
gratitude and humility this is how
people are happy and at this point in
time I have two decades of data of of
intensely working with people across the
life Spectrum across demographic and is
what's the commonality of people who are
have good Lives who are happy it's not
what's their wealth status where do they
live what's their social status how many
kids do they have how much money it's
none of that do they feel a sense of
gratitude do they feel a sense of
humility right and that comes if trauma
isn't weighing on them right if they
have enough sense of self that even if
really bad things have happened to me
and I feel like life has been fair to me
right can I do something good can I go
up my front door and help someone it's
that that makes happiness I see more
happiness in people who who from the
outside have absolutely nothing than I
do sometimes in people that we think
have the world and that's not an
exaggeration right if we get to a point
where we feel gratitude and humility
we've taken care of ourselves and it's
always constructive right the
destructive destroys right I mean look
what did Berlin look like after the
second world war right violence and
destruction outward brings violence and
destruction inward or at a minimum
limits us person who may in a family
system be intimidating everyone around
them there's no life in them or in other
people no one else is expressing any
life and that person doesn't have it in
them either we take the life out of
life right but if we don't do that we
understand ourselves as best we can we
strive to be the best we can be which
means understanding ourselves what's
true and what's not true right what's
what what I'm capable of that I have
some faith in myself and I reasonably
going to try and make myself the best I
can be I'm going to strive well what are
the chances I'm going to feel better
about myself and try to make the world a
better place as opposed to being
destructive and I think we see that as
clearly as math the idea that there's
actually no difference in value between
doing good and doing evil and people say
well if there's no God and we can't
prove that there's a God whether there
is or there isn't there's a difference
and we see it so obviously around us
like what does destruction lead to oh
more destruction right we see that so
obviously yet we'll still argue against
it and I think it's that that we need to
stop doing we need to be responsible for
the very basic facts in our lives which
is why I do believe if we're anchoring
ourselves to health going forward right
I I've written about anchor ourselves to
biological facts like things we know
anchor ourselves to history but it's
also anchor ourselves to early childhood
education right I see a lot from people
in positions of great power that I would
call my mother to come get me if I did
those things in kindergarten like
somehow we can do that we forget lessons
of that we learn in kindergarten I don't
think let's act in in the context of the
the most elevated or esteemed education
we can get no let's start at
kindergarten that's what we need and
sometimes we see people with 15 years of
higher education who need to go back to
kindergarten or learn those rules I mean
I don't say that lightly because that's
the basic value system in us that leads
us to be reasonable to be compassionate
with ourselves and others and for us not
to then either by choice or by stumbling
to it right just enacting destruction
and creating destruction in the world
around us I believe that and I I think
we see it over and over and I do think
it's self-evident if we step back and we
look at it I think it tells us I think
everything from the science of the the
physics where we have to we have to have
counter entropy and parts of the
universe have a possibility for there to
be you know there to be a solar system
we plan it's like it's so overdetermined
to fight against destruction right
that's why have a planet right because
the the atoms in the planet and the
subatomic molecules aren't atomized
across the rest of the universe like
we're going against the grain of
destruction right and and that's no less
true as individual humans as humans
sociologically right with one another as
cultures I I believe that to be true and
I think the I think the truths out there
that that we already have tell us that I
think that's a beautiful place to rap
where can people follow you if a person
is interested there's a website it's Dr
paul.com it's just d r p a u l c n
ti.com and it it has ways to acquire the
book if anyone is interested and feels
it could be of help to them and it has
links to other uh other appearances on
other podcasts love it awesome all right
everybody if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care peace if
you like this conversation check out
this episode to learn more then what you
realize is your capacity to tap into
dopamine as a motivator not just seeking
dopamine rewards that is infinite and I
I can say with with great certainty that
this is
how you were able to build a big company
and sell it how you've been able to
build a successful podcast